
Marcus Aurelius
Meditations
A New Translation, with an Introduction, by Gregory Hays
THE MODERN LIBRARY
NEW YORK
Contents
Title Page
Chronology
Half Title Page
Introduction by Gregory Hays
Meditations
Book 1: Debts and Lessons
Book 2: On the River Gran, Among the Quadi
Book 3: In Carnuntum
Book 4
Book 5
Book 6
Book 7
Book 8
Book 9
Book 10
Book 11
Book 12
Notes
Index of Persons
About the Translator
The Modern Library Editorial Board
Copyright

Meditations
Introduction
Gregory Hays
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
States will never be happy until rulers become philosophers or philosophers become
rulers.
—PLATO, The Republic
Marcus Aurelius is said to have been fond of quoting Plato’s
dictum, and those who have written about him have rarely
been able to resist applying it to Marcus himself. And
indeed, if we seek Plato’s philosopher-king in the flesh we
could hardly do better than Marcus, the ruler of the Roman
Empire for almost two decades and author of the immortal
Meditations. Yet the title is one that Marcus himself would
surely have rejected. He never thought of himself as a
philosopher. He would have claimed to be, at best, a diligent
student and a very imperfect practitioner of a philosophy
developed by others. As for the imperial throne, that came
almost by accident. When Marcus Annius Verus was born, in
A.D. 121, bystanders might have predicted a distinguished
career in the Senate or the imperial administration. They
could hardly have guessed that he was destined for the
imperial purple, or seen in their mind’s eye the lonely bronze
horseman whose upraised hand greets us from the Capitoline
hill in Rome across two thousand years.
Marcus sprang from a distinguished enough family. The
year of his birth coincided with his grandfather’s second
tenure of the consulship, in theory Rome’s highest office,
though now of largely ceremonial importance. And it was to
be his grandfather who brought him up, for his father died
when he was very young. Marcus makes reference in the
Meditations to his father’s character as he remembered it or
heard of it from others, but his knowledge must have been
more from stories than from actual memories. Of the
remainder of his childhood and his early adolescence we
know little more than can be gleaned from the Meditations.
The biography of him in the so-called Historia Augusta (a
curious and unreliable work of the late fourth century
probably based on a lost series of lives by the third-century
biographer Marius Maximus) tells us that he was a serious
child, but also that he loved boxing, wrestling, running and
falconry, that he was a good ballplayer and that he loved to
hunt. None of these are surprising occupations in an upperclass
youth.
Book 1 of the Meditations offers glimpses of Marcus’s
schooling, and we can fill out the picture by what is known
of upper-class education generally at this period. His first
instructors, like the unnamed teacher mentioned in
Meditations 1.5, were probably slaves, from whom he
would have mastered the rudiments of reading and writing.
At a later stage he would have been handed over to private
tutors to be introduced to literature, especially, no doubt,
Vergil’s great epic, the Aeneid. But literature served only as
a preparation for the real goal. This was rhetoric, the key to
an active political career under the empire, as it had been
under the Republic. Under the supervision of a trained rhetor, Marcus would have begun with short exercises before
progressing to full-scale practice declamations in which he
would have been asked to defend one side or another in
imaginary law cases, or to advise a prominent historical
figure at a turning point in his career. (Should Caesar cross
the Rubicon? Should Alexander turn back at the Indus? Why
or why not?)
Such training was conducted in Greek as well as Latin.
Since at least the beginning of the first century B.C. the
Roman upper classes had been essentially bilingual, and
Marcus’s spoken and written Greek would have been as
fluent as the French of a nineteenth-century Russian aristocrat
or the Chinese of a Heian Japanese courtier. Marcus would
have read Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey and the tragedies of
Euripides side by side with the Aeneid, and studied the
speeches of the great Athenian orator Demosthenes as
intensively as those of the Roman statesman Cicero. It was
Greek writers and artists who constituted the intellectual
elite at the capital; when in later life the emperor conversed
with his court physician, Galen, he would have done so in the
latter’s native tongue. Above all, Greek remained
overwhelmingly the language of philosophy. In the late
Republic and early empire, writers like Lucretius, Cicero
and Seneca had worked to create a philosophical literature in
Latin, with notable success. But the great thinkers—Plato,
Aristotle, Theophrastus, Zeno, Chrysippus, Epicurus, etc.—
had all been Greeks. Serious philosophical investigation
required a familiarity with the language they wrote in and the
terminology they developed. That Marcus composed his own
Meditations in Greek is natural enough.
In 137, when Marcus was sixteen, a crucial event took
place. The reigning emperor, Hadrian, was childless. An
illness had brought him near to death a year previously, and
it was clear that he would not live forever. Hadrian owed his
throne to his adoption by his predecessor and distant
relative, Trajan. Following Trajan’s example, Hadrian had
designated the distinguished aristocrat Lucius Ceionius
Commodus to succeed him. In 137, however, Ceionius died
unexpectedly, and Hadrian was forced to cast about for a
new successor. His choice fell on the childless senator
Antoninus, whom he selected with the proviso that Antoninus
should in turn adopt Marcus (his nephew by marriage) along
with Ceionius’s son Lucius Verus, then aged seven. Marcus
took on the family name of his adopted father, becoming
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.
Hadrian’s death the following year left Marcus first in line
for the throne. His education and that of the younger Verus
were now matters of still greater concern, and it is clear that
no expense was spared. For training in Greek rhetoric, he
was entrusted to Herodes Atticus, a fabulously wealthy
Athenian rhetorician whose tempestuous relations with his
family, fellow citizens and the imperial court itself would
have furnished ample material for a soap opera. His
instructor in Latin oratory was Marcus Cornelius Fronto, a
prominent rhetorician from Cirta in North Africa. By an
accident of fate, many of Fronto’s letters to Marcus have
survived, and they illustrate the close relationship between
student and teacher. They also suggest Fronto’s regret at
seeing Marcus move away from rhetoric to delve ever more
deeply into philosophy. The first book of the Meditations
pays tribute to a number of philosophers from whom Marcus
learned, both formally and informally, and he is likely to
have studied with or listened to many others.
Marcus would have learned much outside the classroom as
well. For training in legal and political matters, an informal
apprenticeship bound aristocratic youths to older public
figures—men like Junius Rusticus, whose influence Marcus
chronicles in 1.7. But the single greatest influence was surely
Marcus’s adopted father, Antoninus Pius. Marcus would
have watched as Antoninus received embassies, tried legal
cases and dictated letters to his deputies. Meanwhile
Marcus’s own position as heir apparent was signaled in
various ways. In 140 he served as consul (at the age of
nineteen), and would serve again in 145. In the same year he
married Antoninus’s daughter Faustina, to whom he pays
tribute in Meditations 1.17.
Edward Gibbon’s History of the Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire describes the reign of Antoninus as
“furnishing very few materials for history, which is indeed
little more than the register of the crimes, follies, and
misfortunes of mankind.” It furnishes equally little material
for Marcus’s biography. In the decade and a half between
145 and 161 we learn little of Marcus’s occupations, and our
only glimpses of his inner development come from his
correspondence with Fronto. But the two poles that would
govern the remainder of his life—the court and philosophy—
seem by this point to be fully established. There is no
evidence that Marcus experienced anything like the
“conversion” to philosophy that some ancient figures
experienced (or affected), but it is clear that by the middle to
late 140s philosophy was becoming increasingly central to
his life.
On August 31, 161, Antoninus died, leaving Marcus as his
sole successor. Marcus immediately acted to carry out what
appears to have been Hadrian’s original intention (perhaps
ignored by Antoninus) by pushing through the appointment of
his adopted brother, Lucius Verus, as co-regent. Verus’s
character has suffered by comparison with Marcus’s. Ancient
sources, in particular the gossipy Historia Augusta, tend to
paint him as a self-indulgent degenerate—almost another
Nero. This may be unfair; it is certainly not the picture of him
we get from Marcus’s own reminiscences in the
Meditations. It does seem clear, however, that Marcus
functioned as the senior emperor in fact if not name. It would
be surprising if he had not. He was almost a decade older,
and had been trained for the position by Antoninus himself.
What kind of ruler did this philosopher-king prove to be?
Not, perhaps, as different from his predecessors as one might
have expected. Though an emperor was all-powerful in
theory, his ability to control policy was in reality much more
limited. Much of his time was spent fielding problems that
had moved up the administrative ladder: receiving embassies
from the large cities of the empire, trying appeals of criminal
cases, answering queries from provincial governors and
dealing with petitions from individuals. Even with a
functional system of imperial couriers, news could take
weeks to travel from the periphery of the empire to the
center; imperial edicts took time to move down the chain of
command. While the emperor’s decision had the force of
law, enforcement was almost entirely in the hands of
provincial governors, whose diligence might be affected by
incompetence, corruption, or an understandable desire not to
antagonize local elites.
We get occasional glimpses of Marcus’s day-to-day duties
from the evidence of imperial decisions preserved in letters,
inscriptions and the legal codes. Surviving legislation shows
a certain interest in the freeing of slaves and in regulations
relating to the guardianship of orphans. Attempts have been
made to tie the first to Marcus’s philosophical convictions
and the second to his own memories of life without a father.
But it remains unclear how much of the policy is due to
Marcus himself, and how far it differs from that of Marcus’s
predecessor, Antoninus. Perhaps more interesting are the
traces of Marcus’s personality to be discerned in the
phrasing of imperial documents, where we find a scrupulous
attention to detail and a self-consciousness about linguistic
usage that seems to differentiate Marcus from his
predecessors. Neither trait surprises in the author of the
Meditations or a student of Fronto, whose extant letters
place great stress on the quest for the mot juste.
One of Marcus’s priorities was to preserve good relations
with the Senate. The goal was to disguise the absoluteness
with which the emperor ruled: to preserve a facade—and
sometimes, no doubt, even to achieve the reality—of
consensus and cooperation. A hundred years before,
aristocrats might have dreamed of a restored Republic (as
some certainly did). But by the second century it was clear
that there was no alternative to the principate. The Senate
expected deference in public and hoped for influence behind
the scenes; “good” emperors were willing to play along. In
cultivating the upper classes Marcus was following in the
footsteps of Antoninus and Trajan, rather than of Hadrian,
whose relations with the Senate had been prickly. And it is
this, as much as anything else, that is responsible for his
reputation as a benevolent statesman. An emperor might do
as he liked while he lived, but it was the senatorial historians —men like Cornelius Tacitus in the 120s or Cassius Dio in
the generation after Marcus’s death—who had the last word.
Another area where Marcus’s policy continued that of his
predecessors related to a small and eccentric sect known as
the Christians. In the course of the next century they would
become an increasing problem for the imperial
administration, and they were prominent enough in Marcus’s
day to attract an extended denunciation from a certain Celsus,
part of whose work “Against the Christians” still survives.
The sect met with contempt from those intellectuals who
deigned to take notice of it (Marcus’s tutor Fronto was
evidently one), and with suspicion and hostility from
ordinary citizens and administrators. The Christians’
disfavor stemmed from their failure to acknowledge the gods
worshipped by the community around them. Their
“atheism”—their refusal to accept any god but their own—
endangered their neighbors as well as themselves, and their
reluctance to acknowledge the divine status of the emperor
threatened the social order and the well-being of the state.
Christianity had been illegal since the early second century
when a query from Pliny the Younger (then governor of
Bithynia in Asia Minor) prompted the emperor Trajan to
establish a formal policy: While Christians were not to be
sought out, those who confessed to the faith were to be
executed. But empire-wide persecution did not become a
reality until a much later date. The main threat to Christians
in the second century came from individual provincial
governors, acting either on their own initiative or under
pressure from local communities. In the late 170s, for
example, civic unrest at Lyons resulted in a virtual pogrom of
Greek-speaking Christians resident there. Marcus’s mentor
Junius Rusticus had tried and executed Christians (the
apologist Justin Martyr among them) in his capacity as city
prefect. Marcus himself was no doubt aware of Christianity,
but there is no reason to think that it bulked large in his mind.
The one direct reference to it in the Meditations (11.3) is
almost certainly a later interpolation, and the implicit
references some scholars have discerned are surely illusory.
Marcus, in any case, had more serious concerns than this
troublesome cult. Soon after his accession, relations between
Rome and its only rival, the Parthian empire in the East, took
a dramatic turn for the worse. Since at least the time of
Trajan the two states had been locked in a cold war that
would continue for the next two centuries, and that once a
generation or so flared up into a military conflict. The death
of Antoninus and the accession of two new and untried rulers
may have tempted the Parthian ruler Vologaeses III to test the
waters. In 162 his forces occupied Armenia and wiped out a
Roman garrison that had gone to the rescue. Syria itself was
threatened. Rome had no choice but to respond.
It was Verus, the younger emperor, who was sent east,
where he remained for the next four years. Neither he nor
Marcus had any military experience to speak of (Antoninus’s
peaceful reign had given little scope for it), and the day-today
conduct of the war was no doubt left to the professionals.
After initial setbacks the Romans rallied and, under such
commanders as the dynamic young Avidius Cassius, forced
the Parthians to sue for peace. Parthia would remain a threat,
but one that could be dealt with by diplomatic means for the
immediate future.
Verus and his senior colleague had no time to bask in their
triumph, however. Within a year the empire was in the grip
of a devastating plague, apparently brought back from the
East by Lucius’s troops. Its effects may not have been quite
as apocalyptic as later writers suggest, but the death toll was
certainly high, and it also delayed the emperors’ response to
a second threat. This was the increasing instability on the
empire’s other border, the northern frontier that separated
Rome from the barbarian peoples of Germany, eastern
Europe and Scandinavia. During this period a number of
these tribes were under pressure from peoples farther north
and reacted by moving across the empire’s borders—not for
conquest, but in search of land to settle. Rome’s reaction
alternated between aggressive resistance and attempts at
accommodation; its failure to develop a workable policy
would eventually result in the collapse of the Western empire
some three centuries later.
In some places a line could be drawn. Hadrian’s great
wall, stretching across Britain, was intended to secure the
empire’s most distant frontier; under Antoninus it had been
briefly superseded by a second line farther to the north. But
such fortifications were impracticable on the continent, and it
was there that the threat was concentrated. Rome still
remembered the catastrophe of A.D. 9, when the Roman
general Varus and three legions had marched into the forests
of Germany, never to return. In the second century, the
greatest source of anxiety was the area farther south, roughly
corresponding to modern-day Romania and Hungary.
Trajan’s conquest of Dacia two generations before had
cleared out a possible source of trouble, but the potential for
friction remained. In Marcus’s day three peoples presented a
special problem: the Quadi, the Marcomanni, and the
Jazyges, also called Sarmatians. The removal of three
legions to Parthia had seriously weakened the Roman
position on the northern frontier, and barbarians took
advantage of the situation. In 168, Marcus and Verus
marched north to deal with them.
Much of the remainder of the reign would be spent on
intermittent warfare, first in the so-called Marcomannic
Wars of the early 170s and then in a second campaign later in
that decade. And most of the burden was to be borne by
Marcus alone, for Verus died suddenly (apparently of a
stroke) in early 169. It was a very different kind of war than
the traditional campaign Verus’s armies had waged. The
conventional military and diplomatic tactics that worked
against the Parthians were of limited use here. Instead, the
Romans had to negotiate with individual chieftains whose
authority was limited and whose reliability was always in
doubt. When negotiation failed, the only alternative was a
slow and bloody succession of small-scale engagements
rather than pitched battles. The progress of the campaign is
recorded on the column erected in Rome to commemorate the
close of the Marcomannic Wars. In spite of its triumphal
purpose, the engraved scenes that spiral around the
monument paint a grim picture of brutal fighting, devastation
and execution. “Spiders are proud of catching flies,” Marcus
notes mordantly, “men of catching hares, fish in a net, boars,
bears, Sarmatians” (10.10). The gruesome vignette that opens
Meditations 8.34 (“a severed hand or foot, or a decapitated
head”) may well reflect Marcus’s own experience.
By 175 the Romans seemed to have gained the upper hand.
But at this point disturbing news arrived. Avidius Cassius,
who had distinguished himself as a general during the
Parthian War and who as governor of Syria now served as
virtual regent of the Eastern empire, had revolted and
declared himself emperor. Some of the Eastern provinces
(notably Cappadocia) remained loyal to Marcus, but Cassius
was recognized as emperor throughout much of the East, and
in particular in Egypt, whose grain supply was crucial to the
capital. Civil war seemed inevitable, and was prevented
only by Cassius’s assassination at the hands of a subordinate. Marcus was nevertheless obliged to travel east to reassert
his authority, taking with him Faustina (who died in the
course of the journey). He visited the major cities of the East,
Antioch and Alexandria, arriving finally at Athens, where he
was initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries, a set of mystic
rites connected with the worship of Demeter, the goddess of
agriculture.
Now in his fifties, Marcus was in declining health, and the
revolt of Cassius had only underlined the need to make
arrangements for the succession. Faustina had borne at least
thirteen children, many of whom had died young. By the mid170s,
Marcus had only one surviving son, Commodus, just
entering his teens. There was no reason for Marcus to
continue the policy of adoption followed by his
predecessors, and there is no reason to think he even
considered it. The years that follow see Commodus’s rapid
promotion to a position not far short of co-emperor. He was
consul in 177 at the age of fifteen. In the same year he was
accorded all the major imperial privileges, except for the
post of Pontifex Maximus, the head of the Roman state
religion, held by the reigning emperor alone, and for life.
The gains of the Marcomannic Wars had not proved
permanent, and in 178, Marcus and Commodus marched
north again. Two years later Marcus died at age fifty-eight,
the first emperor to pass on the throne to his son since
Vespasian a century before. Sadly, Commodus’s
performance did not bear out whatever promise Marcus had
discerned in him. He was to be remembered as a dissolute
tyrant, a second Caligula or Nero whose many defects were
only emphasized by the contrast with his father. His
assassination after a twelve-year reign would usher in the
first in a series of power struggles that would burden the
empire for the next century.
Philosophical Background
The composition of the Meditations is normally dated to the
170s—Marcus’s last decade. That this was a dark and
stressful period for him can hardly be doubted. In the ten
years between 169 and 179 he had to cope with constant
fighting on the frontier, the abortive revolt of Cassius, and the
deaths of his colleague Verus; his wife, Faustina; and others.
Though he could hardly have anticipated the century of
turmoil that would follow his death, he may have suspected
that his son and successor, Commodus, was not the man he
hoped. That in these circumstances Marcus should have
sought consolation in philosophy is only natural. But
understanding what Marcus looked for from his
philosophical studies requires a certain amount of
orientation. To understand the Meditations in context, we
must familiarize ourselves not only with Stoicism, the
philosophical system that underlies the work, but also with
the role of philosophy in ancient life more generally.
Today philosophy is an academic discipline, one that few
people other than professional philosophers would consider
central to their everyday existence. While we may think of
ourselves as having a “philosophy of life,” it bears little
relation to what goes on in the philosophy departments of our
universities. The careers of twentieth-century analytic
philosophy often seem remote from what the American
philosopher Thomas Nagel terms “mortal questions”: the
problems involved in making ethical choices, constructing a
just society, responding to suffering and loss, and coming to
terms with the prospect of death. Indeed, most of us would be
inclined to see these issues as the province of religion rather
than philosophy.
For Marcus and his contemporaries, the situation was very
different. Ancient philosophy certainly had its academic side.
Athens and other large cities had publicly financed chairs of
philosophy, and professional philosophers taught, argued and
wrote, as they do today. But philosophy also had a more
practical dimension. It was not merely a subject to write or
argue about, but one that was expected to provide a “design
for living”—a set of rules to live one’s life by. This was a
need not met by ancient religion, which privileged ritual over
doctrine and provided little in the way of moral and ethical
guidelines. Nor did anyone expect it to. That was what
philosophy was for.
Philosophy in the modern sense is largely the creation of
one man, the fifth-century B.C. Athenian thinker Socrates. But
it is primarily in the Hellenistic period that we see the rise of
philosophical sects, promulgating coherent “belief systems”
that an individual could accept as a whole and which were
designed to explain the world in its totality. Of these
Hellenistic systems the most important, both for Romans in
general and for Marcus in particular, was the Stoic school.
The movement takes its name from the stoa (“porch” or
“portico”) in downtown Athens where its founder, Zeno
(332/3–262 B.C.), taught and lectured. Zeno’s doctrines were
reformulated and developed by his successors, Cleanthes
(331–232 B.C.) and Chrysippus (280–c. 206 B.C.).
Chrysippus in particular was a voluminous writer, and it was
he who laid the foundations for systematic Stoicism. This
early “academic” Stoicism is the source of certain key terms
and concepts that reappear frequently in the Meditations, and
proper understanding of Marcus’s approach requires some
familiarity with the system as a whole.
Stoicism
Of the doctrines central to the Stoic worldview, perhaps the
most important is the unwavering conviction that the world is
organized in a rational and coherent way. More specifically,
it is controlled and directed by an all-pervading force that
the Stoics designated by the term logos. The term (from
which English “logic” and the suffix “-logy” derive) has a
semantic range so broad as to be almost untranslatable. At a
basic level it designates rational, connected thought—
whether envisioned as a characteristic (rationality, the ability
to reason) or as the product of that characteristic (an
intelligible utterance or a connected discourse). Logos
operates both in individuals and in the universe as a whole.
In individuals it is the faculty of reason. On a cosmic level it
is the rational principle that governs the organization of the
universe.1
In this sense it is synonymous with “nature,”
“Providence,” or “God.” (When the author of John’s Gospel
tells us that “the Word”—logos—was with God and is to be
identified with God, he is borrowing Stoic terminology.)
All events are determined by the logos, and follow in an
unbreakable chain of cause and effect. Stoicism is thus from
the outset a deterministic system that appears to leave no
room for human free will or moral responsibility. In reality
the Stoics were reluctant to accept such an arrangement, and
attempted to get around the difficulty by defining free will as
a voluntary accommodation to what is in any case inevitable.
According to this theory, man is like a dog tied to a moving
wagon. If the dog refuses to run along with the wagon he will
be dragged by it, yet the choice remains his: to run or be
dragged. In the same way, humans are responsible for their
choices and actions, even though these have been anticipated
by the logos and form part of its plan. Even actions which
appear to be—and indeed are—immoral or unjust advance
the overall design, which taken as a whole is harmonious and
good. They, too, are governed by the logos.
But the logos is not simply an impersonal power that
governs and directs the world. It is also an actual substance
that pervades that world, not in a metaphorical sense but in a
form as concrete as oxygen or carbon. In its physical
embodiment, the logos exists as pneuma, a substance
imagined by the earliest Stoics as pure fire, and by
Chrysippus as a mixture of fire and air. Pneuma is the power —the vital breath—that animates animals and humans. It is,
in Dylan Thomas’s phrase, “the force that through the green
fuse drives the flower,” and is present even in lifeless
materials like stone or metal as the energy that holds the
object together—the internal tension that makes a stone a
stone. All objects are thus a compound of lifeless substance
and vital force. When Marcus refers, as he does on a number
of occasions, to “cause and material” he means the two
elements of these compounds—inert substance and animating
pneuma—which are united so long as the object itself exists. When the object perishes, the pneuma that animated it is
reabsorbed into the logos as a whole. This process of
destruction and reintegration happens to individual objects at
every moment. It also happens on a larger scale to the entire
universe, which at vast intervals is entirely consumed by fire
(a process known as ekpyrosis), and then regenerated.2
If the world is indeed orderly, if the logos controls all
things, then the order it produces should be discernible in all
aspects of it. That supposition not only led the Stoics to
speculate about the nature of the physical world but also
motivated them to seek the rationality characteristic of the
logos in other areas, notably in formal logic and the nature
and structure of language (their interest in etymology is
reflected in several entries in the Meditations). This
systematizing impulse reappears in many other fields as well.
The catalogue of Chrysippus’s own works preserved by the
late-third-century biographer Diogenes Laertius is very long
indeed; it includes not only philosophical treatises in a
narrow sense, but also works such as “On How to Read
Poetry” and “Against the Touching Up of Paintings.” Later
Stoics would try their hands at history and anthropology as
well as more conventionally philosophical topics.
The expansion of Stoic thought was not only intellectual
but also geographical. The movement had been born in
Athens. In the century and a half that followed Chrysippus’s
death it spread to other centers, in particular to Rome. The
Romans of the second century B.C. were in the midst of a
course of conquest that by the end of the century would leave
them the effective masters of the Mediterranean. With
conquest came culture. Looking back on the rapid
Hellenization of the Roman aristocracy between 200 B.C. and
his own day, the poet Horace famously observed that
“conquered Greece was the true conqueror.” Nowhere is the
influence of Greece more obvious than in philosophy. Greek
philosophers, including the Stoics, Panaetius (c. 185–109
B.C.), and Posidonius (c. 135–50 B.C.), visited Rome to
lecture. Many spent extended periods there. In the first
century B.C. it became the fashion for young upper-class
Romans to study in Athens, in an ancient version of the
eighteenth-century Grand Tour. Roman aristocrats acted as
patrons to individual philosophers and assembled large
libraries of philosophical texts (like that at the famous Villa
of the Papyri at Herculaneum), and Romans like Cicero and
Lucretius attempted to expound Greek philosophical
doctrines in Latin.
Of the major philosophical schools, it was Stoicism that
had the greatest appeal. Unlike some other sects, the Stoics
had always approved of participation in public life, and this
stand struck a chord with the Roman aristocracy, whose code
of values placed a premium on political and military activity.
Stoicism has even been described, not altogether unfairly, as
the real religion of upper-class Romans. In the process it
became a rather different version of the philosophy from that
taught by Zeno and Chrysippus. Perhaps the most important
development was a shift in emphasis, a narrowing of focus.
Early and middle Stoicism was a holistic system. It aimed to
embrace all knowledge, and its focus was speculative and
theoretical. Roman Stoicism, by contrast, was a practical
discipline—not an abstract system of thought, but an attitude
to life. Partly for historical reasons, it is this Romanized
Stoicism that has most influenced later generations. Indeed,
the application of the adjective “stoic” to a person who
shows strength and courage in misfortune probably owes
more to the aristocratic Roman value system than it does to
Greek philosophers.
Stoicism in its later form was a system inspired as much
by individuals as by texts or doctrines. One of its most
distinguished adherents was Marcus Cato (known as Cato the
Younger to distinguish him from his great-grandfather,
prominent a century earlier). A senator of renowned rectitude
when Julius Caesar marched on Rome in 49 B.C., Cato sided
with Caesar’s rival Pompey in defense of the legitimate
government. When it was clear that Caesar would triumph,
Cato chose not to survive the Republic, killing himself after
the battle of Munda in 46. Within a century he had become an
emblem of Stoic resistance to tyranny. Under Nero he was
immortalized by the poet Lucan and praised in a laudatory
biography by the senator Thrasea Paetus, whose own
resistance to Nero cost him his life. Thrasea’s son-in-law,
Helvidius Priscus, played a similar role—and came to a
similar end—under Vespasian. Thrasea and Helvidius in
their turn served as role models to second-century aristocrats
like Marcus’s mentors Rusticus, Maximus, and Severus. Marcus himself pays tribute to them (and to Cato) in
Meditations 1.14.
Cato, Thrasea, and Helvidius were doers, not writers, and
their legendary heroism inevitably lends them a somewhat
two-dimensional quality. A more complex and much more
interesting figure was the poet Lucan’s uncle, Lucius
Annaeus Seneca (c. 4 B.C.–A.D. 65), commonly known as
Seneca the Younger to distinguish him from his equally
distinguished father. Originally councillor to the young Nero,
he was eventually forced to commit suicide after being
implicated in an attempted coup against his erstwhile pupil. Men’s lives are not always consistent with their ideals, and
some critics have found it hard to reconcile Seneca’s
fabulous wealth and his shameless flattery of Nero with his
philosophical views. Yet his works (in particular the Letters
to Lucilius) remain the most engaging and accessible
expressions of later Stoicism. Because they were written in
Latin they were also among the most influential on
succeeding generations.
But not all Stoics were wealthy senators. There was
another kind of Stoic exemplar as well: the outsider whose
ascetic lifestyle won him the admiration of his wealthier
contemporaries and enabled him to criticize the pretenses of
upper-class society with real authority. An early example of
the type is Gaius Musonius Rufus (c. 30–100), a member of
the Roman administrative class, the so-called knights
(equites), who was banished by both Nero and Vespasian. A
still more dramatic example was Musonius’s student
Epictetus (c. 55–c. 135), who had taken up the practice of
philosophy as a slave and devoted the remainder of his life
to it after being freed. He had been exiled to Nicopolis (in
northern Greece) under Domitian, and after the tyrant’s death,
elected to remain there where he taught and lectured to
visitors who often traveled great distances to study with him.
One of these was the upper-class historian and statesman
Arrian (c. 86–160), who published an extensive record of the
master’s discussions, a text conventionally referred to as the
Discourses of Epictetus. He later produced an abridged
version, the Encheiridion (“Manual” or “Handbook”).
Epictetus seems to have been an especially important figure
for Marcus. He thanks his philosophical mentor Rusticus for
introducing him to “Epictetus’s lectures” (either the
Discourses themselves or a private set of lecture notes), and
a series of quotations and paraphrases from the philosopher
appear in Book 11 of the Meditations. And Arrian’s
abridged Encheiridion provides the closest literary parallel
to the Meditations itself, not only in its content, but also in
its form: a series of relatively short and unrelated entries.
Stoicism and the Meditations
The late Stoicism of Epictetus is a radically stripped-down
version of its Hellenistic predecessor, a philosophy which
“had learnt much from its competitors and had almost
forgotten parts of itself.”
3 Both these tendencies, the
narrowing of the field and the eclectic borrowing from non-
Stoic sources, can be discerned also in the Meditations.
Chrysippus and his followers had divided knowledge into
three areas: logic, physics and ethics, concerned,
respectively, with the nature of knowledge, the structure of
the physical world and the proper role of human beings in
that world. Marcus pays lip service to this triadic division in
at least one entry (8.13), but it is clear from other chapters
and from the Meditations as a whole that logic and physics
were not his focus. Among the things for which he thanks the
gods is that he was never “absorbed by logic-chopping, or
preoccupied by physics” (1.17). Occasional entries show an
awareness of Stoic thought about language (the etymological
pun in 8.57 is perhaps the clearest example), but they are the
exception, not the rule. In many cases Marcus’s logic is weak —the logic of the rhetorician, not of the philosopher; it is
rare to find a developed chain of reasoning like that in
Meditations 4.4. His interest in the nature of the physical
world is limited to its relevance to human problems. About
one of the basic Stoic physical doctrines—the notion of the
periodic conflagration (ekpyrosis) that ends a cosmic cycle —Marcus adopts an agnostic position (though he was not
alone in this). To him it was ethics that was the basis of the
system: “just because you’ve abandoned your hopes of
becoming a great thinker or scientist, don’t give up on
attaining freedom, achieving humility, serving others . . .”
(7.67).
The questions that the Meditations tries to answer are
primarily metaphysical and ethical ones: Why are we here?
How should we live our lives? How can we ensure that we
do what is right? How can we protect ourselves against the
stresses and pressures of daily life? How should we deal
with pain and misfortune? How can we live with the
knowledge that someday we will no longer exist? It would
be both pointless and impertinent to try to summarize
Marcus’s responses; the influence of the Meditations on later
readers springs in part from the clarity and insistence with
which he addresses these questions. It may be worthwhile,
however, to draw attention to one pattern of thought that is
central to the philosophy of the Meditations (as well as to
Epictetus), and that has been identified and documented in
detail by Pierre Hadot. This is the doctrine of the three
“disciplines”: the disciplines of perception, of action and of
the will.
The discipline of perception requires that we maintain
absolute objectivity of thought: that we see things
dispassionately for what they are. Proper understanding of
this point requires a brief introduction to the Stoic theory of
cognition. We have seen that for the Stoics universal order is
represented by the logos. The logos infuses and is wielded
by our hegemonikon (literally, “that which guides”), which
is the intellective part of our consciousness. In different
contexts it can approximate either “will” or “character” and
it performs many of the functions that English speakers
attribute to the brain or the heart.4 One of its primary
functions is to process and assess the data we receive from
our senses. At every instant the objects and events in the
world around us bombard us with impressions. As they do so
they produce a phantasia, a mental impression. From this the
mind generates a perception (hypolepsis), which might best
be compared to a print made from a photographic negative.
Ideally this print will be an accurate and faithful
representation of the original. But it may not be. It may be
blurred, or it may include shadow images that distort or
obscure the original.
Chief among these are inappropriate value judgments: the
designation as “good” or “evil” of things that in fact are
neither good nor evil. For example, my impression that my
house has just burned down is simply that—an impression or
report conveyed to me by my senses about an event in the
outside world. By contrast, my perception that my house has
burned down and I have thereby suffered a terrible tragedy
includes not only an impression, but also an interpretation
imposed upon that initial impression by my powers of
hypolepsis. It is by no means the only possible interpretation,
and I am not obliged to accept it. I may be a good deal better
off if I decline to do so. It is, in other words, not objects and
events but the interpretations we place on them that are the
problem. Our duty is therefore to exercise stringent control
over the faculty of perception, with the aim of protecting our
mind from error.
The second discipline, that of action, relates to our
relationship with other people. Human beings, for Marcus as
for the Stoics generally, are social animals, a point he makes
often (e.g., 5.16, 8.59, 9.1). All human beings possess not
only a share of the logos but also the ability to use it (that is
what makes us human and distinguishes us from other
animals). But it would perhaps be more accurate to say that
we are participants in the logos, which is as much a process
as a substance. Marcus himself more than once compares the
world ruled by logos to a city in which all human beings are
citizens, with all the duties inherent in citizenship. As human
beings we are part of nature, and our duty is to accommodate
ourselves to its demands and requirements—“to live as
nature requires,” as Marcus often puts it. To do this we must
make proper use of the logos we have been allotted, and
perform as best we can the functions assigned us in the
master plan of the larger, cosmic logos, of which it is a part.
This requires not merely passive acquiescence in what
happens, but active cooperation with the world, with fate
and, above all, with other human beings. We were made, Marcus tells us over and over, not for ourselves but for
others, and our nature is fundamentally unselfish. In our
relationships with others we must work for their collective
good, while treating them justly and fairly as individuals.
Marcus never defines what he means by justice, and it is
important to recognize what the term implies and what it
does not. All human beings have a share of the logos, and all
have roles to play in the vast design that is the world. But
this is not to say that all humans are equal or that the roles
they are assigned are interchangeable. Marcus, like most of
his contemporaries, took it for granted that human society
was hierarchical, and this is borne out by the images he uses
to describe it. Human society is a single organism, like an
individual human body or a tree. But the trunk of the tree is
not to be confused with the leaves, or the hands and feet with
the head. Our duty to act justly does not mean that we must
treat others as our equals; it means that we must treat them as
they deserve. And their deserts are determined in part by
their position in the hierarchy. Stoicism’s emphasis on the
orderliness of the universe implies a similar orderliness and
harmony in its parts, and part of its appeal to upper-class
Romans may have been that it did not force its adherents to
ask difficult questions about the organization of the society
they lived in.5
The third discipline, the discipline of will, is in a sense
the counterpart to the second, the discipline of action. The
latter governs our approach to the things in our control, those
that we do; the discipline of will governs our attitude to
things that are not within our control, those that we have
done to us (by others or by nature). We control our own
actions and are responsible for them. If we act wrongly, then
we have done serious harm to ourselves (though not, it
should be emphasized, to others, or to the logos). By
contrast, things outside our control have no ability to harm
us. Acts of wrongdoing by a human agent (torture, theft, or
other crimes) harm the agent, not the victim. Acts of nature
such as fire, illness, or death can harm us only if we choose
to see them as harmful. When we do so, we question the
benevolence and providence of the logos, and thereby
degrade our own logos.
This, of course, we must not do. Instead we must see
things for what they are (here the discipline of perception is
relevant) and accept them, by exercising the discipline of
will, or what Epictetus calls (in a phrase quoted by Marcus)
“the art of acquiescence.” For if we recognize that all events
have been foreseen by the logos and form part of its plan,
and that the plan in question is unfailingly good (as it must
be), then it follows that we must accept whatever fate has in
store for us, however unpleasant it may appear, trusting that,
in Alexander Pope’s phrase, “whatever is, is right.” This
applies to all obstacles and (apparent) misfortunes, and in
particular to death—a process that we cannot prevent, which
therefore does not harm us, and which accordingly we must
accept willingly as natural and proper.
Together, the three disciplines constitute a comprehensive
approach to life, and in various combinations and
reformulations they underlie a large number of the entries in
the Meditations. We see them laid out starkly and explicitly
in Meditations 7.54:
Everywhere, at each moment, you have the option:
• to accept this event with humility [will];
• to treat this person as he should be treated [action];
• to approach this thought with care, so that nothing irrational creeps in
[perception].
We find the same triad rephrased and reordered in
Meditations 9.6: “Objective judgment . . . Unselfish action . .
. Willing acceptance . . . of all external events.”
And we find it in a more subtle form underlying
Meditations 8.7:
. . . progress for a rational mind means not accepting falsehood or uncertainty
in its perceptions, making unselfish actions its only aim, seeking and shunning
only the things it has control over, embracing what nature demands of it—the
nature in which it participates, as the leaf’s nature does in the tree’s.
A score of other entries could be cited. The almost obsessive
repetition of these three points suggests that they lie at the
very heart of Marcus’s thought, and of his project in the
Meditations.
Other Influences
Marcus Aurelius is often thought of and referred to as the
quintessential Stoic. Yet the only explicit reference to
Stoicism in the Meditations (5.10) is phrased in curiously
distant terms, as if it were merely one school among others.
The great figures of early Stoicism are conspicuous by their
absence. Neither Zeno nor Cleanthes is mentioned in the
Meditations, and Chrysippus appears only twice—quoted
once in passing for a pithy comparison (6.42) and included
with Socrates and Epictetus in a list of dead thinkers (7.19).
This is not to deny the essentially Stoic basis of Marcus’s
thought, or the deep influence on him exercised by later Stoic
thinkers (most obviously Epictetus). If he had to be identified
with a particular school, that is surely the one he would have
chosen. Yet I suspect that if asked what it was that he
studied, his answer would have been not “Stoicism” but
simply “philosophy.”
There is nothing surprising about this. The imperial period
saw the development of a widespread ecumenical tendency
in philosophy. Adherents of most of the major schools—the
Platonists, Peripatetics, Cynics, and Stoics—preferred to
focus on the points they shared, rather than those that
separated them. Not all the figures Marcus credits as
influential on his own philosophical development were
Stoics; Severus, for example, was a Peripatetic. Although
authors like Seneca and Epictetus accepted the basic
premises of the system developed by Zeno and Chrysippus,
they showed no reluctance to borrow aphorisms, anecdotes,
and argumentative strategies from non-Stoic sources. The
Meditations follows a similar procedure. While built on a
Stoic foundation, it also refers to and quotes a wide range of
figures, both precursors of the Stoics and representatives of
rival schools.
Of the predecessors Marcus invokes, the most important is
surely Socrates, the great Athenian thinker who had helped
redirect philosophy from a preoccupation with the physical
world to a focus on the role of man in society and the nature
of human morality. Socrates himself wrote nothing. His
teachings were transmitted (and greatly elaborated) in the
philosophical dialogues of his student Plato. Marcus quotes
Plato repeatedly (especially in Book 7), and Socratic or
Platonic elements can be discerned elsewhere too. One
example is the so-called Socratic paradox, the claim that no
one does wrong willingly, and that if men were able to
recognize what is right, they would inevitably do it. “They
are like this,” Marcus says of other people, “because they
can’t tell good from evil” (2.1), and he repeats this assertion
elsewhere.
Socrates’ character was as important as his doctrines. His
legendary endurance and self-denial made him an ideal
model for the Stoic philosopher—or any philosopher. His
refusal to compromise his philosophical beliefs led him to
make the ultimate sacrifice when he was put on trial at the
age of seventy on trumped-up charges of impiety. His display
of integrity at the trial and his comportment in the days
leading up to his execution made it easy to view him as a
forerunner of first-century Stoic martyrs like Thrasea Paetus
or Helvidius Priscus, and it is in this light that Marcus
evokes him in Meditations 7.66.
Of Socrates’ predecessors (the so-called pre-Socratic
thinkers), the most important, both for Marcus and the Stoics
generally, was Heraclitus, the mysterious figure from
Ephesus (in modern-day Turkey) whose Zenlike aphorisms
were proverbial for their profundity and obscurity alike.
Heraclitus’s philosophical system ascribed a central role to
logos and to fire as the primordial element. Both elements
were naturally congenial to the Stoics, and may well have
influenced them. Heraclitus is mentioned in a handful of
entries in the Meditations (4.46, 6.47), but his doctrines can
be traced in many others. Moreover, his concision and
epigrammatic phrasing anticipate the kind of enigmatic
apothegm we find in a number of entries:
The best revenge is not to be like that. (6.6)
Straight, not straightened. (7.12)
The fencer’s weapon is picked up and put down again. The boxer’s is part of
him. (12.9)
It is from Heraclitus that Marcus derives one of his most
memorable motifs, that of the unstable flux of time and matter
in which we move. “We cannot step twice into the same
river,” Heraclitus had said, and we see Marcus expanding on
the observation: “Time is a river, a violent current of events,
glimpsed once and already carried past us, and another
follows and is gone” (4.43; and compare 2.17, 6.15).
Though Heraclitus was clearly the pre-Socratic who most
influenced Marcus, other thinkers leave traces as well. Marcus twice borrows the poet Empedocles’ image of the
self-contained soul as a perfect sphere (8.41, 12.3), and he
alludes once to the mystic doctrines of the Pythagoreans
(11.27). Several entries explore the implications of phrases
attributed to Democritus, one of the inventors of the theory of
atoms, which would later inspire the Hellenistic philosopher
Epicurus.
Neither Heraclitus nor Socrates had founded a school.
That was an achievement reserved for Plato, and then for
Plato’s student Aristotle, who broke from his master to found
the Peripatetic movement. Marcus never refers to Aristotle,
though he does quote approvingly from the latter’s successor
Theophrastus (2.10). Probably more important was another
fourth-century B.C. movement: Cynicism. The Cynics, of
whom the first and most notorious was the irascible
Diogenes of Sinope, were united less by doctrine than by a
common attitude, namely their contempt for societal
institutions and a desire for a life more in accord with nature.
Diogenes himself was largely responsible for the image of a
philosopher as an impoverished ascetic (the “philosopher
without clothes” evoked by Marcus at Meditations 4.30
might well be a Cynic). His famous claim to be a “citizen of
the world” surely anticipates, if it did not actually influence,
the Stoic conception of the world as a city-state. Marcus
refers to Diogenes in several passages, as well as to the
latter’s student Monimus (2.15), and invokes another Cynic,
Crates, at Meditations 6.13, in an anecdote whose tenor is
now uncertain.
Marcus’s relationship to Epicureanism, Stoicism’s great
rival among Hellenistic philosophical systems, is much more
vexed. The followers of Epicurus (341–270 B.C.) believed in
a universe radically unlike that posited by Zeno and
Chrysippus. The Stoic world is ordered to the nth degree; the
Epicurean universe is random, the product of the haphazard
conjunctions of billions of atoms. To speak of Providence in
such a world is transparently absurd, and while Epicurus
acknowledged the existence of gods, he denied that they took
any interest in human life. As for humans, our role is simply
to live as best we can, making the most of what pleasures are
available to us and insulating ourselves as far as possible
from pain and anxiety. In particular, we are to feel no anxiety
about death, which consists simply in the dissolution of our
component atoms. This process is not only inevitable, but
harmless, for the simple reason that after death there is no
“us” to suffer harm.
Although the sect numbered not a few prominent Romans
among its adherents, it never attained the success of
Stoicism, and was regarded with genial contempt by most
outsiders. The quietism endorsed by the Epicureans was
obviously difficult to reconcile with an active public life—
an important Roman value—and the Epicurean equation of
the good with pleasure was bound to raise eyebrows among
conservative Romans. “Eat, drink and be merry” was
popularly supposed to be the Epicureans’ motto, though
Epicurus himself had been quite explicit in identifying
pleasure with intellectual contemplation rather than the
vulgar enjoyment of food and sex. Though a minority view,
Epicureanism was, nonetheless, the only potential rival to
Stoicism in offering a systematic cosmology, as Marcus
acknowledges on a number of occasions by the stark
dichotomy “Providence or atoms” (4.3, 10.6, 11.18, 12.14).
Marcus normally seems to view Epicureanism with
disapproval (as we would expect). In Meditations 6.10 he
contrasts the Epicurean universe, founded on “mixture,
interaction, dispersal” with the components of the Stoic
system: “unity, order, design”—clearly to the advantage of
the latter. Should we not be ashamed to fear death, he asks in
another entry, when “even” the Epicureans disdain it?
(12.34). But other entries suggest a less dismissive attitude. Marcus quotes with apparent approval Epicurus’s account of
his own exemplary conduct during an illness (9.41) and
twice seeks comfort in the philosopher’s remarks on the
endurance of pain (7.33, 7.64). Like other late Stoics
(Seneca is a notable example), he was willing to accept truth
wherever he found it.
Thus far we have been concerned with the content of the
Meditations: the ethical doctrine of late Stoicism,
incorporating a certain amount of Platonic and Heraclitean
material, and overlaid with occasional reference to other
schools and thinkers. But what of the Meditations itself?
How and why was it written? Who is its audience? What
kind of book is it? For the answers to these questions we
must turn from the book’s content to its form and origins.
The MEDITATIONS: Genre, Structure, and Style
I suspect that Marcus would have been surprised (and
perhaps rather dismayed) to find himself enshrined in the
Modern Library of the World’s Best Books. He would have
been surprised, to begin with, by the title of the work
ascribed to him. The long-established English title
Meditations is not only not original, but positively
misleading, lending a spurious air of resonance and authority
quite alien to the haphazard set of notes that constitute the
book. In the lost Greek manuscript used for the first printed
edition—itself many generations removed from Marcus’s
original—the work was entitled “To Himself” (Eis
heauton). This is no more likely than Meditations to be the
original title, though it is at least a somewhat more accurate
description of the work.6
In fact, it seems unlikely that Marcus himself gave the
work any title at all, for the simple reason that he did not
think of it as an organic whole in the first place. Not only
was it not written for publication, but Marcus clearly had no
expectation that anyone but himself would ever read it. The
entries include a number of cryptic references to persons or
events that an ancient reader would have found as
unintelligible as we do. While a contemporary might have
recognized some of the figures mentioned in Meditations
8.25 or 12.27, for example, no ancient reader could have
known what was in the letter that Rusticus wrote from
Sinuessa (1.7), what Antoninus said to the customs agent at
Tusculum (1.16), or what happened to Marcus at Caieta
(1.17). Elsewhere Marcus reflects directly on his role as
emperor, in terms that would be quite irrelevant to anyone
else. We find him worrying about the dangers of becoming
“imperialized” (6.30), reminding himself to speak simply in
the Senate (8.30), and reflecting on the unique position he
occupies (11.7). From these entries and others it seems clear
that the “you” of the text is not a generic “you,” but the
emperor himself. “When you look at yourself, see any of the
emperors” (10.31).
How are we to categorize the Meditations? It is not a
diary, at least in the conventional sense. The entries contain
little or nothing related to Marcus’s day-to-day life: few
names, no dates and, with two exceptions, no places. It also
lacks the sense of audience—the reader over one’s shoulder —that tends to characterize even the most secretive diarist.
Some scholars have seen it as the basis for an unwritten
larger treatise, like Pascal’s Pensées or the notebooks of
Joseph Joubert. Yet the notes are too repetitive and, in a
philosophical sense, too elementary for that. The entries
perhaps bear a somewhat closer resemblance to the working
notes of a practicing philosopher: Wittgenstein’s Zettel, say,
or the Cahiers of Simone Weil. Yet here, too, there is a
significant difference. The Meditations is not tentative and
exploratory, like the notes of Wittgenstein or Weil, and it
contains little or nothing that is original. It suggests not a
mind recording new perceptions or experimenting with new
arguments, but one obsessively repeating and reframing ideas
long familiar but imperfectly absorbed.
Perhaps the best description of the entries is that suggested
by the French scholar Pierre Hadot. They are “spiritual
exercises” composed to provide a momentary stay against the
stress and confusion of everyday life: a self-help book in the
most literal sense. A revealing comment in this context is
Meditations 5.9, where Marcus reminds himself “not to think
of philosophy as your instructor, but as the sponge and egg
white that relieve ophthalmia—as a soothing ointment.” On
this reading, the individual entries were composed not as a
record of Marcus’s thoughts or to enlighten others, but for his
own use, as a means of practicing and reinforcing his own
philosophical convictions. Such an interpretation accounts
for several aspects of the entries that would otherwise be
puzzling. It explains the predominance of the imperative in
the text; its purpose is not to describe or reflect (let alone to
“meditate”), but to urge, direct, and exhort.7 And it explains
also the repetitiveness that strikes any reader of the work
almost immediately—the continual circling back to the same
few problems. The entries do not present new answers or
novel solutions to these problems, but only familiar answers
reframed. It was precisely this process of reframing and
reexpressing that Marcus found helpful.
The recognition that the entries are as much process as
product also accounts for the shapelessness and apparent
disorder of the work. We do not know by whom or on what
basis the individual books of the Meditations were arranged;
the order may be chronological, or partly chronological, or
wholly arbitrary. The arrangement of the individual entries
may or may not be Marcus’s own, though its very
randomness suggests that it goes back to the author (a later
editor would have been tempted to group together
thematically similar entries, and perhaps to tie up some of the
more obvious loose ends). Nor can we always be sure where
individual entries begin and end; in some cases this is a
question Marcus himself might not have been able to
answer.8
A special position is occupied by Book 1, which is
distinguished from the rest of the work by its
autobiographical nature and by the greater impression of
conscious design and ordering apparent in it. It consists of
seventeen entries in which Marcus reflects on what he
learned from various individuals in his life, either directly or
from their example (hence the title I have given the section
here, “Debts and Lessons,” which has no warrant in the
transmitted text). The entries roughly mirror the chronology
of Marcus’s early life, from his older relatives to his
teachers to his adopted father, Antoninus, and ultimately to
the gods.9 This logical schema, as well as the increasing
length of the entries, suggests deliberate arrangement,
presumably by Marcus himself. If so, then this book, at least,
was conceived as an organic whole. It may be among the
latest portions of the text, if scholars are correct in thinking
(as most do) that the short sketch of Antoninus Pius in
Meditations 6.30 was the starting point for the longer
memoir in 1.16.
Attempts to find organic unity in the remaining books or
development from book to book are doomed to failure. Wherever one opens the Meditations (with the exception of
Book 1) we find the same voice, the same themes; Marcus’s
thought does not change or develop noticeably from one book
to another. Nor can any structure or unity be discerned within
individual books. It seems most likely that the division
between books is a purely physical one. The transmitted
“books,” in other words, represent the individual papyrus
rolls of Marcus’s original, or perhaps of a later copy. When
one had been filled, another was begun.10
If the books as a whole are homogenous, the individual
entries show considerable formal variety. Some are
developed short essays that make a single philosophical
point; many of the entries in Books 2 and 3 are of this type.
Others are straightforward imperatives (“Take the shortest
route . . .”) or aphorisms (“no one can keep you from living
in harmony with yourself”). Sometimes Marcus will list a
number of basic principles in catalogue format (“remember
that . . . and that . . . and that . . .”). Elsewhere he puts
forward an analogy, sometimes with the point of comparison
left to be inferred. Thus human lives are like “many lumps of
incense on the same altar” (4.15) or like “a rock thrown in
the air” (9.17). In other cases the analogy will be made
explicit: “Have you ever seen a severed hand or foot . . . ?
That’s what we do to ourselves . . . when we rebel against
what happens to us” (8.34). Others present a kind of formal
meditative exercise, as when Marcus instructs himself to
imagine the age of Vespasian (4.32) or Augustus’s court
(8.31) and then to compare the imagined scene with that of
his own time. Portions of two books (7 and 11) consist
simply of quotations. Some entries appear to be rough drafts
for others; several of the raw quotations from tragedies in
Book 7 are incorporated in the much more polished
Meditations 11.6. The significance of some entries remains
completely obscure. Few critics have known what to make of
notes like “Character: dark, womanish, obstinate” (4.28) or
“They don’t realize how much is included in stealing,
sowing, buying . . .” (3.15).
The entries also differ considerably in the degree of
artistry they display. Some entries are little more than
Marcus’s notes or reminders to himself—the philosophical
equivalent of “Phone Dr. re appt. Tues.?” But others are
highly literary. Marcus wrote as a man trained in the
rhetorical techniques of the second century. His thoughts
naturally took on the impress of his training and intellectual
milieu even when he was writing for himself alone.
The shorter entries often display an interest in wordplay
and a striving for epigrammatic brevity that recalls both the
ingenuity of the rhetorical schools and the paradoxical
compression of Heraclitus:
Does the sun try to do the rain’s work? Or Asclepius Demeter’s? (6.43)
Evil: the same old thing. (7.1)
Not a dancer but a wrestler . . . (7.61)
To accept it without arrogance, to let it go with indifference. (8.33)
The philosophical tradition may have been influential on
another element that we find occasionally: the intermittent
snatches of dialogue or quasi-dialogue. As a developed
form, the philosophical dialogue goes back to Plato, who
was imitated by later philosophers, notably Aristotle (in his
lost works) and Cicero. The Meditations certainly does not
contain the kind of elaborate scene setting that we expect in a
true dialogue, but we do find in a number of entries a kind of
internal debate in which the questions or objections of an
imaginary interlocutor are answered by a second, calmer
voice which corrects or rebukes its errors. The first voice
seems to represent Marcus’s weaker, human side; the second
is the voice of philosophy.
The longer entries (none, of course, are very long) are
marked by a coherent if sometimes slightly labored style. Not
all critics have had kind words for Marcus’s expository
prose, and some have been inclined to attribute perceived
shortcomings to deficiencies in his Greek. But in all
likelihood the occasional awkwardness is due less to an
imperfect grasp of the language than to roughness of
composition—Marcus thinking aloud or groping for an idea.
The same explanation may underlie one of the most
noticeable features of Marcus’s prose—namely, his tendency
to string together pairs of near-synonymous words and
phrases, as if uncertain whether he has hit the target the first
time. When combined with the very abstract vocabulary
natural in philosophical prose, this can make for difficult
reading, especially in English, which privileges concision
and concrete vocabulary to a greater degree than Greek. At
its best, however, Marcus’s writing can be extraordinarily
effective, most of all when it strikes a balance between
image and idea, as in the opening of 5.23:
Keep in mind how fast things pass by and are gone—those that are now, and
those to come. Existence flows past us like a river: the “what” is in constant
flux, the “why” has a thousand variations. Nothing is stable, not even what’s
right here. The infinity of past and future gapes before us—a chasm whose
depths we cannot see.
This particular topic—the transience of human life, the
constant change that shapes and informs the world—is a
recurrent theme in the Meditations, and as we shall see, it is
one whose treatment owes as much to literary as to
philosophical models, and as much to Marcus’s own
character as to Stoic doctrine.
Recurring Themes
To try to extract a sustained and coherent argument from the
Meditations as a whole would be an unprofitable exercise. It
is simply not that kind of work. It would be equally fruitless
to try to read autobiographical elements into individual
entries (to take 9.42 as referring to the revolt of Avidius
Cassius, for example, or 10.4 as a reflection on Commodus) —all the more so since so few of the entries can be dated
with any security. This is not to say that the Meditations has
no unity or no relationship to Marcus’s own life, for it has
both. What unifies it is the recurrence of a small number of
themes that surely reflect Marcus’s own preoccupations. It is
the points to which Marcus returns most often that offer the
best insight into his character and concerns.
One example that will strike almost any reader is the sense
of mortality that pervades the work. Death is not to be feared, Marcus continually reminds himself. It is a natural process,
part of the continual change that forms the world. At other
points it is the ultimate consolation. “Soon you will be
dead,” Marcus tells himself on a number of occasions, “and
none of it will matter” (cf. 4.6, 7.22, 8.2). The emphasis on
the vanity and worthlessness of earthly concerns is here
linked to the more general idea of transience. All things
change or pass away, perish and are forgotten. This is the
burden of several of the thought exercises that Marcus sets
himself: to think of the court of Augustus (8.31), of the age of
Vespasian or Trajan (4.32), the great philosophers and
thinkers of the past (6.47)—all now dust and ashes.
This theme is not specific to Stoicism. We meet it at every
turn in ancient literature. Marcus himself quotes the famous
passage in Book 6 of Homer’s Iliad in which the lives of
mortals are compared to leaves that grow in the spring,
flourish for a season and then fall and die, to be replaced by
others (10.34). He would have recognized the sentiment in
other writers too, from the melancholy Greek lyric poet
Mimnermus, who develops and expands on Homer’s simile,
to the Roman lawyer Servius Sulpicius, writing to his friend
Cicero on the death of the latter’s daughter:
I want to share with you something that brought me not a little consolation, in
hopes that it might have the same effect on you. On my way back from Asia,
on the voyage from Aegina to Megara, I gazed at the lands we passed.
Aegina was behind me, Megara before me, Piraeus on the starboard side,
Corinth to port—towns which flourished once upon a time, and now lie fallen
and in ruins before our eyes—and I said to myself, “Alas! . . . and will you,
Servius, not restrain your grief and recall that you were born a mortal?”
Believe me, the thought was no small consolation to me.
This is not a point modern grief counselors would be
inclined to dwell on, but it is one that Marcus would have
understood perfectly, and its appeal to him casts light on both
his character and his background. Marcus may have been a
Stoic, but he was also a Roman, influenced not only by Zeno
and Chrysippus but by Homer and Vergil. Vergil is nowhere
mentioned in the Meditations, and in a Greek work could
hardly be quoted or alluded to, but there is a note of
melancholy that runs through the work that one can only call
Vergilian.
Other concerns surface as well. A number of entries
discuss methods of dealing with pain or bodily weakness of
other sorts. “When you have trouble getting out of bed . . .”
begin several entries (5.1, 8.12). A persistent motif is the
need to restrain anger and irritation with other people, to put
up with their incompetence or malice, to show them the
errors of their ways. Several entries focus on the frustrations
of life at court, nowhere more present than when Marcus tells
himself to stop complaining about them (8.9). He contrasts
the court against philosophy as a stepmother against a mother —to be visited out of duty, but not someone we can really
love (6.12). Yet the court need not be an obstacle: it can be a
challenge, even an opportunity. One can lead a good life
anywhere, even at court, as Antoninus showed (5.16, 1.16).
“No role [is] so well suited to philosophy,” Marcus tells
himself, “as the one you happen to be in right now” (11.7).
A more subtle clue to Marcus’s personality is the imagery
that he prefers. It is worth noting, for example, how many
images of nature occur in the Meditations. Many readers
have been struck by Meditations 3.2, with its evocation of
“nature’s inadvertence” in baking bread or ripening figs,
olives, and stalks of wheat. Metaphors and offhand
comparisons in other entries evoke the pastoral and
agricultural rhythms of the Mediterranean world, with its
flocks, herds, and vines, its seasons of sowing and
harvesting, its grapes drying slowly into raisins. Some of
these may be stock examples, but even a stock example can
be revealing. One can hardly read a page of Plato without
tripping over the helmsmen, doctors, shoemakers, and other
craftsmen who populated ancient Athens; such figures are
much rarer in Marcus. The image of society as a tree whose
branches are individual human beings expresses an important
Stoic principle, but the image is developed further than one
might expect and informed by what might be personal
observation: “You can see the difference between the branch
that’s been there since the beginning, remaining on the tree
and growing with it, and the one that’s been cut off and
grafted back.”
Affection for the natural world contrasts with a persistent
sense of disgust and contempt for human life and other human
beings—a sense that it is difficult to derive from (or even
reconcile with) Stoicism. As P. A. Brunt puts it, “Reason
told Marcus that the world was good beyond improvement,
and yet it constantly appeared to him evil beyond remedy.”
The courtiers who surround him are vain and obsequious,
while the people he deals with on a daily basis are
“meddling, ungrateful, arrogant, dishonest, jealous, and
surly” (2.1). One of the most frequently recurring points in
the Meditations is the reminder that human beings are social
animals, as if this was a point Marcus had a particularly hard
time accepting. The gods care for mortals, he reminds
himself, “and you—on the verge of death—you still refuse to
care for them.”
There is a persistent strain of pessimism in the work. “The
things we want in life are empty, stale, and trivial. Dogs
snarling at each other. Quarreling children—laughing and
then bursting into tears a moment later. Trust, shame, justice,
truth—‘gone from the earth and only found in heaven.’ Why
are you still here?” (5.33). Images of dirt appear in several
entries. The world around us resembles the baths: “oil,
sweat, dirt, grayish water, all of it disgusting” (8.24). If
Marcus contemplates the stars, he does so only in order to
“wash off the mud of life below” (7.47). And the objective
analysis Marcus prizes often shades over into a depressing
cynicism (in the modern sense of the term). “Disgust at what
things are made of: Liquid, dust, bones, filth. Or marble as
hardened dirt, gold and silver as residues, clothes as hair,
purple dye as shellfish blood. And all the rest” (9.36). The
human body itself is no more than “rotting meat in a bag”
(8.38). “[D]espise your flesh. A mess of blood, pieces of
bone, a woven tangle of nerves, veins, arteries” (2.2).
Perhaps the most depressing entry in the entire work is the
one in which Marcus urges himself to cultivate an
indifference to music (11.2).
As one scholar has observed, “reading the Meditations for
long periods can be conducive of melancholy.” And even
those who love the book cannot deny that there is something
impoverishing about the view of human life it presents. Matthew Arnold, whose essay on the work reveals a deep
respect and affection for Marcus, identified the central
shortcoming of his philosophy as its failure to make any
allowance for joy, and I think this is a fair criticism. Marcus
does not offer us a means of achieving happiness, but only a
means of resisting pain. The Stoicism of the Meditations is
fundamentally a defensive philosophy; it is noteworthy how
many military images recur, from references to the soul as
being “posted” or “stationed” to the famous image of the
mind as an invulnerable fortress (8.48). Such images are not
unique to Marcus, but one can imagine that they might have
had special meaning for an emperor whose last years were
spent in “warfare and a journey far from home” (2.17). For
Marcus, life was a battle, and often it must have seemed—
what in some sense it must always be—a losing battle.
There are also a handful of points in the text where we
have glimpses of a different frame of mind, most obviously
when Marcus refers to the gods. From a Stoic perspective, of
course, “God” or “the gods” (the terms are used
interchangeably by many ancient writers) are merely
conventional terms for what we might equally well call
“nature” or “the logos” or “Providence,” or simply “how
things are.” Marcus stresses the benevolence of this power
(what is divine must be good, surely?), but it is clear that he
also ascribes to its actions the implacability with which
orthodox Stoic doctrine endows it. It is not easy to see why
one should pray to a power whose decisions one can hardly
hope to influence, and indeed Marcus several times seems to
admit the possibility that one should not (5.7, 6.44, 9.40).
It is all the more surprising, then, to find Marcus
elsewhere suggesting a more personal concern on the gods’
part. The final entry of Book 1 is the most obvious example.
Here Marcus indicates that the gods have aided him quite
directly “through their gifts, their help, their inspiration,” just
as they have others (cf. 9.11). Their help is curiously
concrete. Among the things for which they are thanked are
“remedies granted through dreams,” including “the one at
Caieta” (1.17; the text is uncertain). The gods also assist
other people, he reminds himself, “just as they do you—by
signs and dreams and every other way” (9.27). That Marcus
himself did believe deeply in the gods, not merely as a figure
of speech but as a real force in his own life, is suggested by
his refutation of those who doubt their existence: “I know the
gods exist. . . .—from having felt their power, over and
over” (12.28). How was this personal relationship with the
divine to be reconciled with the impersonal logos of the
Stoics? The question seems to be played out in the dialogue
at Meditations 9.40. “But those are things the gods left up to
me,” protests one voice, to which another responds, “And
what makes you think the gods don’t care about what’s up to
us?” Marcus himself may not have fully recognized or
acknowledged this conflict, but its existence may point to a
half-conscious awareness that the answer Stoicism offered
was not in every respect satisfactory.
Later Influence
How or by whom the Meditations was preserved is
unknown. The late-fourth-century Historia Augusta paints a
picture of Marcus lecturing on the Meditations to a
spellbound audience at Rome—one of the charming fantasies
in which that peculiar work abounds, but certainly an
invention. The passage does suggest, however, that the text
was in circulation by the fourth century, when it is also
mentioned by the orator Themistius. It was very likely
familiar also to a contemporary of Themistius’s, the neopagan
emperor Julian (known to later ages as Julian the
Apostate), in whose dialogue “The Caesars” Marcus is
pictured as a model for the kind of philosopher-king that
Julian himself aspired to be.
The century that followed Themistius and Julian was one
of decline, at least in the West—decline in political
institutions, and also in the knowledge of Greek. For the next
thousand years Marcus’s work, like that of Homer and
Euripides, would remain unknown to Western readers.
Copies survived in the Greek-speaking East, of course, but
even there the Meditations seems to have been little read.
For centuries, all trace of it is lost, until at the beginning of
the tenth century it reappears in a letter from the scholar and
churchman Arethas, who writes to a friend, “I have had for a
while now a copy of the Emperor Marcus’s invaluable book.
It was not only old but practically coming apart. . . . I have
had it copied and can now pass it on to posterity in better
shape.” Whether Arethas’s copy was indeed responsible for
the work’s survival we do not know. At any rate, its
readership seems to have increased in the centuries that
followed. It is quoted a generation or two later by the vast
Byzantine encyclopedia known as the Suda, and it was
perhaps around this period also that an unknown Byzantine
poet composed a brief appreciation that came to be copied
along with the text:
ON THE BOOK OF MARCUS
If you desire to master pain
Unroll this book and read with care,
And in it find abundantly
A knowledge of the things that are,
Those that have been, and those to come.
And know as well that joy and grief
Are nothing more than empty smoke.
The fall of Constantinople to the Turks in 1453 led to an
exodus of scholars, bringing with them the Greek texts that
inspired the Italian Renaissance. The Meditations must have
been among them. Yet even at this date the work’s survival
hung by a thread. The only complete manuscript to survive is
a fourteenth-century codex (now in the Vatican), which is
riddled with errors. The first printed edition did not appear
until 1559, when Wilhelm Holzmann (known as Xylander)
produced a text from what seems to have been a more
reliable manuscript. That manuscript, unfortunately, has not
survived. But even at its best it was a very imperfect witness
to what Marcus himself wrote. Our text of the Meditations
contains a number of passages that are garbled or in which
one or more crucial words seem to have been omitted. Some
of these errors may be due to the confused state of Marcus’s
original copy. Others may have been accidentally introduced
in the course of the copying and recopying that the work
underwent in the millennium following Marcus’s death. In
some cases the informed guesswork of scholars over several
centuries has been able to restore the original text. In others,
there is still uncertainty.11
The Meditations has never attracted great interest from
professional students of the classics, and the reasons are
perhaps understandable. It contains few direct references to
historical events and provides relatively little material for
social historians. As evidence for later Stoicism it pales
beside the greater bulk of Epictetus’s Discourses. Yet it has
always exerted a fascination on those outside the narrow
orbit of classical study, perhaps especially on those who can
best appreciate the pressures that Marcus himself faced. The
Meditations was among the favorite reading of Frederick the
Great; a recent American president has claimed to reread it
every few years. But it has attracted others too, from poets
like Pope, Goethe, and Arnold to the southern planter
William Alexander Percy, who observed in his
autobiography that “there is left to each of us, no matter how
far defeat pierces, the unassailable wintry kingdom of
Marcus Aurelius. . . . It is not outside, but within, and when
all is lost, it stands fast.”
12
If Marcus has been studied less than many ancient authors,
he has been translated more than most. But it has been a
generation since his last English incarnation, and the time
seems ripe for another attempt. My intention in what follows
has been to represent in readable English both the content
and the texture of the Meditations. I have been especially
concerned to convey the patchwork character of the original,
both the epigrammatic concision that characterizes some
entries and the straggling discursiveness of others. I hope the
results will bear out my conviction that what a Roman
emperor wrote long ago for his own use can still be
meaningful to those far removed from him in time and space. We do not live in Marcus’s world, but it is not as remote
from us as we sometimes imagine. There could be no better
witness to the effect of the Meditations on a modern reader
than the Russian poet Joseph Brodsky, whose essay “Homage
to Marcus Aurelius” takes its departure from the famous
statue of the emperor on the Capitoline hill in Rome:
I saw him for the last time a few years ago, on a wet winter night, in the
company of a stray Dalmatian. I was returning by taxi to my hotel after one
of the most disastrous evenings in my entire life. The next morning I was
leaving Rome for the States. I was drunk. The traffic moved with the speed
one wishes for one’s funeral. At the foot of the Capitol I asked the driver to
stop, paid, and got out of the car. . . . Presently I discovered I was not alone:
a middle-sized Dalmatian appeared out of nowhere and quietly sat down a
couple of feet away. Its sudden presence was so oddly comforting that
momentarily I felt like offering it one of my cigarettes. . . . For a while we
both stared at the horseman’s statue. . . . And suddenly—presumably
because of the rain and the rhythmic pattern of Michelangelo’s pilasters and
arches—all got blurred, and against that blur, the shining statue, devoid of any
geometry, seemed to be moving. Not at great speed, and not out of this place;
but enough for the Dalmatian to leave my side and follow the bronze
progress.
FURTHER READING
The standard modern biography of Marcus is A. R. Birley, Marcus Aurelius (1966; rev. ed., New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 1987), which makes full use of the
principal ancient literary sources—not only the Meditations
(especially Book 1), but the remains of the history of Dio
Cassius, the letters of Fronto and the biography of Marcus in
the so-called Historia Augusta. Birley also draws on recent
research into the careers of upper-class officeholders
(prosopography) and the workings of the imperial
administration to paint a picture of Marcus’s background and
the society he moved in.
The most comprehensive and reliable treatment of the
Antonine age can be found in the Cambridge Ancient
History, volume XI, The High Empire, A.D. 70–192
(Cambridge University Press, 2000). Edward Gibbon’s
famous characterization of the period in the opening chapters
of his History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
remains well worth reading, although the picture it paints
may be too rosy-colored. A useful counterbalance is E. R.
Dodds, Pagan and Christian in an Age of Anxiety
(Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1965),
which offers a very different assessment of the period.
Treatments of special topics abound, and only a few titles
can be mentioned. The upper-class education that Marcus
enjoyed is described by S. F. Bonner, Education in Ancient
Rome (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977). E.
Champlin’s Fronto and Antonine Rome (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1980) is the best modern study of
Marcus’s teacher. Glen Bowersock’s Greek Sophists in the
Roman Empire (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969) is a
fundamental study of intellectual culture in the second
century. Fergus Millar’s The Emperor in the Roman World
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1977) is an
exhaustive analysis of the civil and administrative functions
performed by Marcus and his fellow emperors,
complemented for military matters by J. B. Campbell’s The
Emperor and the Roman Army (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1984).
Most of the major ancient sources for Marcus and his
world are conveniently printed with facing-page English
translations in the Loeb Classical Library. The valuable but
highly unreliable life of Marcus in the Historia Augusta can
be found in the three volumes of Scriptores Historiae
Augustae, trans. D. Magie (1921–1932), as well as in A.
Birley, trans., Lives of the Later Caesars (New York:
Penguin, 1976). The Loeb series also includes the letters of
Fronto, trans. C. R. Haines (2 volumes, 1919); and of the
historian Dio Cassius, trans. E. Cary (9 volumes, 1914–
1927, of which the last two are relevant to Marcus).
Although composed and collected a generation before
Marcus’s birth, the Letters of Pliny the Younger, trans. Betty
Radice (2 volumes, 1969), are a rich and illuminating source
for upper-class society in the mid-empire. Insight into the
intellectual life of the period can be gained from the Attic
Nights of the antiquarian Aulus Gellius, trans. J. C. Rolfe (3
volumes, 1927), the works of the satirist Lucian, trans. A. M.
Harmon, K. Kilburn and M. D. MacLeod (8 volumes, 1913–
1967), and Philostratus’s entertaining Lives of the Sophists,
trans. W. C. Wright (1921). Finally, mention should be made
of two modern novels set in the Antonine period, Walter
Pater’s Marius the Epicurean (1885) and Marguerite
Yourcenar’s Memoirs of Hadrian (1951). Neither should be
mistaken for a primary source, but each is, in its different
way, a masterpiece.
Recent work on Hellenistic philosophy has done much to
illuminate the philosophical background of the Meditations.
A clear and helpful introduction to both Stoicism and
Epicureanism can be found in A. A. Long, Hellenistic
Philosophy (London: Duckworth, 1974); on a much larger
scale is Keimpe Algra, Jonathan Barnes and Jaap Mansfeld,
eds., The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999). On
Stoicism see also F. H. Sandbach, The Stoics (London:
Chatto and Windus, 1975), and J. Rist, Stoic Philosophy
(Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1969). The
works of the two most important Stoics, Zeno and
Chrysippus, are largely lost; their surviving fragments are
translated in the first volume of A. A. Long and David
Se d l e y, The Hellenistic Philosophers (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1987), which also includes
much material on Epicureanism. An important source for the
history of both schools is Diogenes Laertius’s Lives of the
Philosophers, trans. R. D. Hicks, in the Loeb series (2
volumes, 1925).13
For Stoicism under the empire, the most important sources
are the works of Seneca the Younger and Epictetus. The best
introduction to Seneca is probably the Letters to Lucilius, of
which a selection is available in Letters from a Stoic, trans.
R. Campbell (New York: Penguin, 1969). Epictetus’s
Discourses and the Encheiridion are available in the Loeb
series in a translation by W. A. Oldfather (2 volumes, 1925).
T h e Encheiridion has also been translated by T. W.
Higginson (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1955).
For the Meditations itself the indispensable resource
(though long out of print and difficult to obtain) is A.S.L.
Farquharson’s The Meditations of the Emperor Marcus
Antoninus, 2 vols. (Oxford, Eng.: Oxford University Press,
1944). I have derived benefit from a number of earlier
English translations, notably those of Farquharson (recently
reprinted with a new introduction by R. B. Rutherford);
George Long (1862); C. R. Haines (Loeb, 1916); G.M.A.
Grube (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1963) and Maxwell
Staniforth (New York: Penguin, 1964), as well as from W.
Theiler’s German translation (Zurich: Artemis, 1951) and the
French edition of Book 1 by Pierre Hadot (Paris: Les Belles
Lettres, 1998). The best modern edition of the Greek text is
that by J. Dalfen (2d ed., B. G. Teubner, 1987), though in
vexed passages I have sometimes preferred different
readings.
Among scholarly studies of the Meditations, three in
particular deserve mention. P. A. Brunt, “Marcus Aurelius in
His Meditations,” Journal of Roman Studies 64 (1974): 1–
20, analyzes the themes that especially exercise Marcus.
Pierre Hadot, The Inner Citadel: The “Meditations” of
Marcus Aurelius, trans. M. Chase (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1998), is a thoughtful
reconstruction of Marcus’s philosophical system. R. B.
Rutherford, The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius: A Study
(Oxford, Eng.: Clarendon, 1989), is an excellent analysis
from a more literary perspective, with good remarks also on
Marcus’s relationship with the gods. Among the many
appreciations by nonclassicists two deserve special mention:
Matthew Arnold’s “Marcus Aurelius” (originally a review
of Long’s translation) in his Lectures and Essays in
Criticism, ed. R. H. Super (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1962), and Joseph Brodsky’s “Homage to
Marcus Aurelius” in his collection On Grief and Reason
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1995).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Karen Schwabach read through an initial draft of the
translation and suggested numerous improvements, for which
I am deeply grateful. For help of various sorts I am also
indebted to Deborah DeMania, Gregory Gelburd, Krista
Kane, Charles Mathewes, Katherine Odell, Hayden
Pelliccia, Ellyn Schumacher, and Alphonse Vinh. My
colleagues in the Department of Classics at the University of
Virginia, and in particular my department chair, John Miller, made it possible for me to take course relief during the fall
semester of 2001, when much of the work was completed.
Thanks are due finally to my editor, Will Murphy, for his
patience and enthusiasm for this project.
INTRODUCTION NOTES
1. In this larger sense, rather than attempting to translate it, I
have generally left it simply as “(the) logos.” I hope that
readers who have assimilated such terms as “karma” and
“the Tao” will be prepared to welcome this one too.
2. So, too, some modern physicists have imagined a series of
universes produced by an alternation of expansions and
contractions—“big bangs” and “big crunches.”
3. Ramsay Macmullen, Enemies of the Roman Order
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1966), p.
48.
4. Earlier translators have been driven to clumsy equivalents
such as “Guiding Reason.” I have generally rendered it
“mind,” as being perhaps the least unsatisfactory English
equivalent.
5. Two examples are worth pointing to. Marcus finds the
gladiatorial combat and the brutal executions of the arena
a source of tedium (6.46); that they might be morally
wrong seems never to have occurred to him. He prides
himself on not having taken sexual advantage of his slaves,
not because it would have been harmful or unjust to them,
but because such self-indulgence would have been
damaging to his own character (1.17). There is no sign that
he ever questioned slavery as an institution. If asked, he
would no doubt have responded that “true” slavery is the
self-enslavement of the mind to emotion and desire (cf.
8.3, 9.40, 11.30); actual bodily slavery is merely a
condition to be accepted and endured, like nearsightedness
or a cold.
6. A still better title might be “Memoranda,” which suggests
both the miscellaneous character of the work and
something about its intended function. Scores of entries
begin with the injunctions to “remember . . .” or “keep in
mind . . . ,” while the syntax of others (e.g., 12.18)
presupposes such an admonition.
7. In order to stress the self-directed nature of the
Meditations I have sometimes preferred to translate these
as resolutions (“to . . .”) rather than direct commands.
8. The conventional divisions and numbering go back only to
the Latin translation published by Thomas Gataker in
1652. It cannot be regarded as authoritative, and I have
occasionally split up a single entry into two (sometimes
following earlier editors, sometimes not).
9. There are some striking omissions, which may or may not
be significant. Antoninus’s predecessor, Hadrian, is not
mentioned, for example. It may be that Marcus
disapproved of him, or simply that he had little contact
with him before his death in 138. Perhaps more surprising
is the lack of any reference to Herodes Atticus, from
whom Marcus learned Greek rhetoric. Does this point to
personal tensions that arose between the two in later
years? Or does the omission stem from Marcus’s move
away from rhetoric toward philosophy? (It is noteworthy
that the Latin rhetorician Fronto, with whom Marcus seems
to have been close, is allotted only a very brief entry in
comparison with Marcus’s philosophical preceptors.)
10. The openings of Books 2 and 3 differ from those that
follow in including a brief note to identify (presumably)
the place of composition. We do not know whether these
notes go back to Marcus himself, or why the other books
lack them. The average length of the entries in these two
books is perhaps slightly longer than in the later books, but
there are few differences otherwise. Attempts to find a
thematic thread within Books 2 and 3 as a whole are not
convincing.
11. I have noted the most egregious instances in the notes,
and have marked with an obelus (< . . . >) a few passages
where the original is impossible to reconstruct.
12. William Alexander Percy, Lanterns on the Levee (Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1973), p. 313.
13. A survey of work on the predecessors and rivals of the
Stoics is obviously beyond the scope of this note, but two
good starting points may be mentioned. The surviving
fragments of Heraclitus and other early philosophers who
appear in the Meditations are translated in Kathleen
Freeman, Ancilla to the Presocratic Philosophers
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1948 and later reprints). Any reader
unfamiliar with Plato should probably begin with the
Apology of Socrates, available in the Modern Library’s
Selected Dialogues of Plato, trans. B. Jowett, rev. H.
Pelliccia (New York: Random House, 2000) or any
number of other translations.
Book 1
DEBTS AND LESSONS
1. MY GRANDFATHER VERUS
Character and self-control.
2. MY FATHER (FROM MY OWN MEMORIES AND HIS
REPUTATIONf)
Integrity and manliness.
3. MY MOTHER
Her reverence for the divine, her generosity, her inability not
only to do wrong but even to conceive of doing it. And the
simple way she lived—not in the least like the rich.
4. MY GREAT-GRANDFATHER
To avoid the public schools, to hire good private teachers,
and to accept the resulting costs as money well-spent.
5. MY FIRST TEACHER
Not to support this side or that in chariot-racing, this fighter
or that in the games. To put up with discomfort and not make
demands. To do my own work, mind my own business, and
have no time for slanderers.
6. DIOGNETUS
Not to waste time on nonsense. Not to be taken in by
conjurors and hoodoo artists with their talk about
incantations and exorcism and all the rest of it. Not to be
obsessed with quail-fighting or other crazes like that. To hear
unwelcome truths. To practice philosophy, and to study with
Baccheius, and then with Tandasis and Marcianus. To write
dialogues as a student. To choose the Greek lifestyle—the
camp-bed and the cloak.
7. RUSTICUS
The recognition that I needed to train and discipline my
character.
Not to be sidetracked by my interest in rhetoric. Not to
write treatises on abstract questions, or deliver moralizing
little sermons, or compose imaginary descriptions of The
Simple Life or The Man Who Lives Only for Others. To steer
clear of oratory, poetry and belles lettres.
Not to dress up just to stroll around the house, or things
like that. To write straightforward letters (like the one he
sent my mother from Sinuessa). And to behave in a
conciliatory way when people who have angered or annoyed
us want to make up.
To read attentively—not to be satisfied with “just getting
the gist of it.” And not to fall for every smooth talker.
And for introducing me to Epictetus’s lectures—and
loaning me his own copy.
8. APOLLONIUS
Independence and unvarying reliability, and to pay attention
to nothing, no matter how fleetingly, except the logos. And to
be the same in all circumstances—intense pain, the loss of a
child, chronic illness. And to see clearly, from his example,
that a man can show both strength and flexibility.
His patience in teaching. And to have seen someone who
clearly viewed his expertise and ability as a teacher as the
humblest of virtues.
And to have learned how to accept favors from friends
without losing your self-respect or appearing ungrateful.
9. SEXTUS
Kindness.
An example of fatherly authority in the home. What it
means to live as nature requires.
Gravity without airs.
To show intuitive sympathy for friends, tolerance to
amateurs and sloppy thinkers. His ability to get along with
everyone: sharing his company was the highest of
compliments, and the opportunity an honor for those around
him.
To investigate and analyze, with understanding and logic,
the principles we ought to live by.
Not to display anger or other emotions. To be free of
passion and yet full of love.
To praise without bombast; to display expertise without
pretension.
10. THE LITERARY CRITIC ALEXANDER
Not to be constantly correcting people, and in particular not
to jump on them whenever they make an error of usage or a
grammatical mistake or mispronounce something, but just
answer their question or add another example, or debate the
issue itself (not their phrasing), or make some other
contribution to the discussion—and insert the right
expression, unobtrusively.
11. FRONTO
To recognize the malice, cunning, and hypocrisy that power
produces, and the peculiar ruthlessness often shown by
people from “good families.”
12. ALEXANDER THE PLATONIST
Not to be constantly telling people (or writing them) that I’m
too busy, unless I really am. Similarly, not to be always
ducking my responsibilities to the people around me because
of “pressing business.”
13. CATULUS
Not to shrug off a friend’s resentment—even unjustified
resentment—but try to put things right.
To show your teachers ungrudging respect (the Domitius
and Athenodotus story), and your children unfeigned love.
14. [MY BROTHER] SEVERUS
To love my family, truth and justice. It was through him that I
encountered Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato, Dion and Brutus, and
conceived of a society of equal laws, governed by equality
of status and of speech, and of rulers who respect the liberty
of their subjects above all else.
And from him as well, to be steady and consistent in
valuing philosophy.
And to help others and be eager to share, not to be a
pessimist, and never to doubt your friends’ affection for you.
And that when people incurred his disapproval, they always
knew it. And that his friends never had to speculate about his
attitude to anything: it was always clear.
15. MAXIMUSMaximus
Self-control and resistance to distractions.
Optimism in adversity—especially illness.
A personality in balance: dignity and grace together.
Doing your job without whining.
Other people’s certainty that what he said was what he
thought, and what he did was done without malice.
Never taken aback or apprehensive. Neither rash nor
hesitant—or bewildered, or at a loss. Not obsequious —but not aggressive or paranoid either.
Generosity, charity, honesty.
The sense he gave of staying on the path rather than
being kept on it.
That no one could ever have felt patronized by him—or
in a position to patronize him.
A sense of humor.
16. MY ADOPTED FATHER
Compassion. Unwavering adherence to decisions, once he’d
reached them. Indifference to superficial honors. Hard work.
Persistence.
Listening to anyone who could contribute to the public
good.
His dogged determination to treat people as they deserved.
A sense of when to push and when to back off.
Putting a stop to the pursuit of boys.
His altruism. Not expecting his friends to keep him
entertained at dinner or to travel with him (unless they
wanted to). And anyone who had to stay behind to take care
of something always found him the same when he returned.
His searching questions at meetings. A kind of single- mindedness, almost, never content with first impressions, or
breaking off the discussion prematurely.
His constancy to friends—never getting fed up with them,
or playing favorites.
Self-reliance, always. And cheerfulness.
And his advance planning (well in advance) and his
discreet attention to even minor things.
His restrictions on acclamations—and all attempts to
flatter him.
His constant devotion to the empire’s needs. His
stewardship of the treasury. His willingness to take
responsibility—and blame—for both.
His attitude to the gods: no superstitiousness. And his
attitude to men: no demagoguery, no currying favor, no
pandering. Always sober, always steady, and never vulgar or
a prey to fads.
The way he handled the material comforts that fortune had
supplied him in such abundance—without arrogance and
without apology. If they were there, he took advantage of
them. If not, he didn’t miss them.
No one ever called him glib, or shameless, or pedantic.
They saw him for what he was: a man tested by life,
accomplished, unswayed by flattery, qualified to govern both
himself and them.
His respect for people who practiced philosophy—at
least, those who were sincere about it. But without
denigrating the others—or listening to them.
His ability to feel at ease with people—and put them at
their ease, without being pushy.
His willingness to take adequate care of himself. Not a
hypochondriac or obsessed with his appearance, but not
ignoring things either. With the result that he hardly ever
needed medical attention, or drugs or any sort of salve or
ointment.
This, in particular: his willingness to yield the floor to
experts—in oratory, law, psychology, whatever—and to
support them energetically, so that each of them could fulfill
his potential.
That he respected tradition without needing to constantly
congratulate himself for Safeguarding Our Traditional
Values.
Not prone to go off on tangents, or pulled in all directions,
but sticking with the same old places and the same old things.
The way he could have one of his migraines and then go
right back to what he was doing—fresh and at the top of his
game.
That he had so few secrets—only state secrets, in fact, and
not all that many of those.
The way he kept public actions within reasonable bounds —games, building projects, distributions of money and so on —because he looked to what needed doing and not the credit
to be gained from doing it.
No bathing at strange hours, no self-indulgent building
projects, no concern for food, or the cut and color of his
clothes, or having attractive slaves. (The robe from his farm
at Lorium, most of the things at Lanuvium, the way he
accepted the customs agent’s apology at Tusculum, etc.)
He never exhibited rudeness, lost control of himself, or
turned violent. No one ever saw him sweat. Everything was
to be approached logically and with due consideration, in a
calm and orderly fashion but decisively, and with no loose
ends.
You could have said of him (as they say of Socrates) that
he knew how to enjoy and abstain from things that most
people find it hard to abstain from and all too easy to enjoy.
Strength, perseverance, self-control in both areas: the mark
of a soul in readiness—indomitable.
(Maximus’s illness.)
17. THE GODS
That I had good grandparents, a good mother and father, a
good sister, good teachers, good servants, relatives, friends —almost without exception. And that I never lost control of
myself with any of them, although I had it in me to do that,
and I might have, easily. But thanks to the gods, I was never
put in that position, and so escaped the test.
That I wasn’t raised by my grandfather’s girlfriend for
longer than I was. That I didn’t lose my virginity too early,
and didn’t enter adulthood until it was time—put it off, even.
That I had someone—as a ruler and as a father—who
could keep me from being arrogant and make me realize that
even at court you can live without a troop of bodyguards, and
gorgeous clothes, lamps, sculpture—the whole charade. That
you can behave almost like an ordinary person without
seeming slovenly or careless as a ruler or when carrying out
official obligations.
That I had the kind of brother I did. One whose character
challenged me to improve my own. One whose love and
affection enriched my life.
That my children weren’t born stupid or physically
deformed.
That I wasn’t more talented in rhetoric or poetry, or other
areas. If I’d felt that I was making better progress I might
never have given them up.
That I conferred on the people who brought me up the
honors they seemed to want early on, instead of putting them
off (since they were still young) with the hope that I’d do it
later.
That I knew Apollonius, and Rusticus, and Maximus.
That I was shown clearly and often what it would be like
to live as nature requires. The gods did all they could—
through their gifts, their help, their inspiration—to ensure that
I could live as nature demands. And if I’ve failed, it’s no
one’s fault but mine. Because I didn’t pay attention to what
they told me—to what they taught me, practically, step by
step.
That my body has held out, especially considering the life
I’ve led.
That I never laid a finger on Benedicta or on Theodotus.
And that even later, when I was overcome by passion, I
recovered from it.
That even though I was often upset with Rusticus I never
did anything I would have regretted later.
That even though she died young, at least my mother spent
her last years with me.
That whenever I felt like helping someone who was short
of money, or otherwise in need, I never had to be told that I
had no resources to do it with. And that I was never put in
that position myself—of having to take something from
someone else.
That I have the wife I do: obedient, loving, humble.
That my children had competent teachers.
Remedies granted through dreams—when I was coughing
blood, for instance, and having fits of dizziness. And the one
at Caieta.
That when I became interested in philosophy I didn’t fall
into the hands of charlatans, and didn’t get bogged down in
writing treatises, or become absorbed by logic-chopping, or
preoccupied with physics.
All things for which “we need the help of fortune and the
gods.”
Book 2
ON THE RIVER GRAN, AMONG THE QUADI
1. When you wake up in the morning, tell yourself: The
people I deal with today will be meddling, ungrateful,
arrogant, dishonest, jealous, and surly. They are like this
because they can’t tell good from evil. But I have seen the
beauty of good, and the ugliness of evil, and have recognized
that the wrongdoer has a nature related to my own—not of
the same blood or birth, but the same mind, and possessing a
share of the divine. And so none of them can hurt me. No one
can implicate me in ugliness. Nor can I feel angry at my
relative, or hate him. We were born to work together like
feet, hands, and eyes, like the two rows of teeth, upper and
lower. To obstruct each other is unnatural. To feel anger at
someone, to turn your back on him: these are obstructions.
2. Whatever this is that I am, it is flesh and a little spirit and
an intelligence. Throw away your books; stop letting yourself
be distracted. That is not allowed. Instead, as if you were
dying right now, despise your flesh. A mess of blood, pieces
of bone, a woven tangle of nerves, veins, arteries. Consider
what the spirit is: air, and never the same air, but vomited out
and gulped in again every instant. Finally, the intelligence.
Think of it this way: You are an old man. Stop allowing your
mind to be a slave, to be jerked about by selfish impulses, to
kick against fate and the present, and to mistrust the future.
3. What is divine is full of Providence. Even chance is not
divorced from nature, from the inweaving and enfolding of
things governed by Providence. Everything proceeds from it.
And then there is necessity and the needs of the whole world,
of which you are a part. Whatever the nature of the whole
does, and whatever serves to maintain it, is good for every
part of nature. The world is maintained by change—in the
elements and in the things they compose. That should be
enough for you; treat it as an axiom. Discard your thirst for
books, so that you won’t die in bitterness, but in cheerfulness
and truth, grateful to the gods from the bottom of your heart.
4. Remember how long you’ve been putting this off, how
many extensions the gods gave you, and you didn’t use them.
At some point you have to recognize what world it is that you
belong to; what power rules it and from what source you
spring; that there is a limit to the time assigned you, and if
you don’t use it to free yourself it will be gone and will
never return.
5. Concentrate every minute like a Roman—like a man—on
doing what’s in front of you with precise and genuine
seriousness, tenderly, willingly, with justice. And on freeing
yourself from all other distractions. Yes, you can—if you do
everything as if it were the last thing you were doing in your
life, and stop being aimless, stop letting your emotions
override what your mind tells you, stop being hypocritical,
self-centered, irritable. You see how few things you have to
do to live a satisfying and reverent life? If you can manage
this, that’s all even the gods can ask of you.
6. Yes, keep on degrading yourself, soul. But soon your
chance at dignity will be gone. Everyone gets one life. Yours
is almost used up, and instead of treating yourself with
respect, you have entrusted your own happiness to the souls
of others.
7. Do external things distract you? Then make time for
yourself to learn something worthwhile; stop letting yourself
be pulled in all directions. But make sure you guard against
the other kind of confusion. People who labor all their lives
but have no purpose to direct every thought and impulse
toward are wasting their time—even when hard at work.
8. Ignoring what goes on in other people’s souls—no one
ever came to grief that way. But if you won’t keep track of
what your own soul’s doing, how can you not be unhappy?
9. Don’t ever forget these things:
The nature of the world.
My nature.
How I relate to the world.
What proportion of it I make up.
That you are part of nature, and no one can prevent you
from speaking and acting in harmony with it, always.
10. In comparing sins (the way people do) Theophrastus says
that the ones committed out of desire are worse than the ones
committed out of anger: which is good philosophy. The angry
man seems to turn his back on reason out of a kind of pain
and inner convulsion. But the man motivated by desire, who
is mastered by pleasure, seems somehow more selfindulgent,
less manly in his sins. Theophrastus is right, and
philosophically sound, to say that the sin committed out of
pleasure deserves a harsher rebuke than the one committed
out of pain. The angry man is more like a victim of
wrongdoing, provoked by pain to anger. The other man
rushes into wrongdoing on his own, moved to action by
desire.
11. You could leave life right now. Let that determine what
you do and say and think. If the gods exist, then to abandon
human beings is not frightening; the gods would never subject
you to harm. And if they don’t exist, or don’t care what
happens to us, what would be the point of living in a world
without gods or Providence? But they do exist, they do care
what happens to us, and everything a person needs to avoid
real harm they have placed within him. If there were anything
harmful on the other side of death, they would have made
sure that the ability to avoid it was within you. If it doesn’t
harm your character, how can it harm your life? Nature
would not have overlooked such dangers through failing to
recognize them, or because it saw them but was powerless to
prevent or correct them. Nor would it ever, through inability
or incompetence, make such a mistake as to let good and bad
things happen indiscriminately to good and bad alike. But
death and life, success and failure, pain and pleasure, wealth
and poverty, all these happen to good and bad alike, and they
are neither noble nor shameful—and hence neither good nor
bad.
12. The speed with which all of them vanish—the objects in
the world, and the memory of them in time. And the real
nature of the things our senses experience, especially those
that entice us with pleasure or frighten us with pain or are
loudly trumpeted by pride. To understand those things—how
stupid, contemptible, grimy, decaying, and dead they are—
that’s what our intellectual powers are for. And to
understand what those people really amount to, whose
opinions and voices constitute fame. And what dying is—and
that if you look at it in the abstract and break down your
imaginary ideas of it by logical analysis, you realize that it’s
nothing but a process of nature, which only children can be
afraid of. (And not only a process of nature but a necessary
one.) And how man grasps God, with what part of himself he
does so, and how that part is conditioned when he does.
13. Nothing is more pathetic than people who run around in
circles, “delving into the things that lie beneath” and
conducting investigations into the souls of the people around
them, never realizing that all you have to do is to be attentive
to the power inside you and worship it sincerely. To worship
it is to keep it from being muddied with turmoil and
becoming aimless and dissatisfied with nature—divine and
human. What is divine deserves our respect because it is
good; what is human deserves our affection because it is like
us. And our pity too, sometimes, for its inability to tell good
from bad—as terrible a blindness as the kind that can’t tell
white from black.
14. Even if you’re going to live three thousand more years, or
ten times that, remember: you cannot lose another life than
the one you’re living now, or live another one than the one
you’re losing. The longest amounts to the same as the
shortest. The present is the same for everyone; its loss is the
same for everyone; and it should be clear that a brief instant
is all that is lost. For you can’t lose either the past or the
future; how could you lose what you don’t have?
Remember two things:
i. that everything has always been the same, and keeps
recurring, and it makes no difference whether you see
the same things recur in a hundred years or two hundred,
or in an infinite period;
ii. that the longest-lived and those who will die soonest
lose the same thing. The present is all that they can give
up, since that is all you have, and what you do not have,
you cannot lose.
15. “Everything is just an impression.” —Monimus the
Cynic. And the response is obvious enough. But the point is a
useful one, if you take it for what it’s worth.
16. The human soul degrades itself:
i. Above all, when it does its best to become an
abscess, a kind of detached growth on the world. To be
disgruntled at anything that happens is a kind of
secession from Nature, which comprises the nature of
all things.
ii. When it turns its back on another person or sets out to
do it harm, as the souls of the angry do.
iii. When it is overpowered by pleasure or pain.
iv. When it puts on a mask and does or says something
artificial or false.
v. When it allows its action and impulse to be without a
purpose, to be random and disconnected: even the
smallest things ought to be directed toward a goal. But
the goal of rational beings is to follow the rule and law
of the most ancient of communities and states.
17. Human life.
Duration: momentary. Nature: changeable. Perception:
dim. Condition of Body: decaying. Soul: spinning around.
Fortune: unpredictable. Lasting Fame: uncertain. Sum Up:
The body and its parts are a river, the soul a dream and
mist, life is warfare and a journey far from home, lasting
reputation is oblivion.
Then what can guide us?
Only philosophy.
Which means making sure that the power within stays safe
and free from assault, superior to pleasure and pain, doing
nothing randomly or dishonestly and with imposture, not
dependent on anyone else’s doing something or not doing it.
And making sure that it accepts what happens and what it is
dealt as coming from the same place it came from. And
above all, that it accepts death in a cheerful spirit, as nothing
but the dissolution of the elements from which each living
thing is composed. If it doesn’t hurt the individual elements
to change continually into one another, why are people afraid
of all of them changing and separating? It’s a natural thing.
And nothing natural is evil.
Book 3
IN CARNUNTUM
1. Not just that every day more of our life is used up and less
and less of it is left, but this too: if we live longer, can we be
sure our mind will still be up to understanding the world—to
the contemplation that aims at divine and human knowledge?
If our mind starts to wander, we’ll still go on breathing, go
on eating, imagining things, feeling urges and so on. But
getting the most out of ourselves, calculating where our duty
lies, analyzing what we hear and see, deciding whether it’s
time to call it quits—all the things you need a healthy mind
for . . . all those are gone.
So we need to hurry.
Not just because we move daily closer to death but also
because our understanding—our grasp of the world—may be
gone before we get there.
2. We should remember that even Nature’s inadvertence has
its own charm, its own attractiveness. The way loaves of
bread split open on top in the oven; the ridges are just by-
products of the baking, and yet pleasing, somehow: they
rouse our appetite without our knowing why.
Or how ripe figs begin to burst.
And olives on the point of falling: the shadow of decay
gives them a peculiar beauty.
Stalks of wheat bending under their own weight. The
furrowed brow of the lion. Flecks of foam on the boar’s
mouth.
And other things. If you look at them in isolation there’s
nothing beautiful about them, and yet by supplementing nature
they enrich it and draw us in. And anyone with a feeling for
nature—a deeper sensitivity—will find it all gives pleasure.
Even what seems inadvertent. He’ll find the jaws of live
animals as beautiful as painted ones or sculptures. He’ll look
calmly at the distinct beauty of old age in men, women, and at
the loveliness of children. And other things like that will call
out to him constantly—things unnoticed by others. Things
seen only by those at home with Nature and its works.
3. Hippocrates cured many illnesses—and then fell ill and
died. The Chaldaeans predicted the deaths of many others; in
due course their own hour arrived. Alexander, Pompey,
Caesar—who utterly destroyed so many cities, cut down so
many thousand foot and horse in battle—they too departed
this life. Heraclitus often told us the world would end in fire.
But it was moisture that carried him off; he died smeared
with cowshit. Democritus was killed by ordinary vermin,
Socrates by the human kind.
And?
You boarded, you set sail, you’ve made the passage. Time
to disembark. If it’s for another life, well, there’s nowhere
without gods on that side either. If to nothingness, then you no
longer have to put up with pain and pleasure, or go on
dancing attendance on this battered crate, your body—so
much inferior to that which serves it.
One is mind and spirit, the other earth and garbage.
4. Don’t waste the rest of your time here worrying about
other people—unless it affects the common good. It will
keep you from doing anything useful. You’ll be too
preoccupied with what so-and-so is doing, and why, and
what they’re saying, and what they’re thinking, and what
they’re up to, and all the other things that throw you off and
keep you from focusing on your own mind.
You need to avoid certain things in your train of thought:
everything random, everything irrelevant. And certainly
everything self-important or malicious. You need to get used
to winnowing your thoughts, so that if someone says, “What
are you thinking about?” you can respond at once (and
truthfully) that you are thinking this or thinking that. And it
would be obvious at once from your answer that your
thoughts were straightforward and considerate ones—the
thoughts of an unselfish person, one unconcerned with
pleasure and with sensual indulgence generally, with
squabbling, with slander and envy, or anything else you’d be
ashamed to be caught thinking.
Someone like that—someone who refuses to put off
joining the elect—is a kind of priest, a servant of the gods, in
touch with what is within him and what keeps a person
undefiled by pleasures, invulnerable to any pain, untouched
by arrogance, unaffected by meanness, an athlete in the
greatest of all contests—the struggle not to be overwhelmed
by anything that happens. With what leaves us dyed indelibly
by justice, welcoming wholeheartedly whatever comes—
whatever we’re assigned—not worrying too often, or with
any selfish motive, about what other people say. Or do, or
think.
He does only what is his to do, and considers constantly
what the world has in store for him—doing his best, and
trusting that all is for the best. For we carry our fate with us —and it carries us.
He keeps in mind that all rational things are related, and
that to care for all human beings is part of being human.
Which doesn’t mean we have to share their opinions. We
should listen only to those whose lives conform to nature.
And the others? He bears in mind what sort of people they
are—both at home and abroad, by night as well as day—and
who they spend their time with. And he cares nothing for
their praise—men who can’t even meet their own standards.
5. How to act:
Never under compulsion, out of selfishness, without
forethought, with misgivings.
Don’t gussy up your thoughts.
No surplus words or unnecessary actions.
Let the spirit in you represent a man, an adult, a citizen,
a Roman, a ruler. Taking up his post like a soldier
and patiently awaiting his recall from life. Needing
no oath or witness.
Cheerfulness. Without requiring other people’s help. Or
serenity supplied by others.
To stand up straight—not straightened.
6. If, at some point in your life, you should come across
anything better than justice, honesty, self-control, courage—
than a mind satisfied that it has succeeded in enabling you to
act rationally, and satisfied to accept what’s beyond its
control—if you find anything better than that, embrace it
without reservations—it must be an extraordinary thing
indeed—and enjoy it to the full.
But if nothing presents itself that’s superior to the spirit
that lives within—the one that has subordinated individual
desires to itself, that discriminates among impressions, that
has broken free of physical temptations (as Socrates used to
say), and subordinated itself to the gods, and looks out for
human beings’ welfare—if you find that there’s nothing more
important or valuable than that . . .
. . . then don’t make room for anything but it—for anything
that might lead you astray, tempt you off the road, and leave
you unable to devote yourself completely to achieving the
goodness that is uniquely yours. It would be wrong for
anything to stand between you and attaining goodness—as a
rational being and a citizen. Anything at all: the applause of
the crowd, high office, wealth, or self-indulgence. All of
them might seem to be compatible with it—for a while. But
suddenly they control us and sweep us away.
So make your choice straightforwardly, once and for all,
and stick to it. Choose what’s best.
—Best is what benefits me.
As a rational being? Then follow through. Or just as an
animal? Then say so and stand your ground without making a
show of it. (Just make sure you’ve done your homework
first.)
7. Never regard something as doing you good if it makes you
betray a trust, or lose your sense of shame, or makes you
show hatred, suspicion, ill will, or hypocrisy, or a desire for
things best done behind closed doors. If you can privilege
your own mind, your guiding spirit and your reverence for its
powers, that should keep you clear of dramatics, of wailing
and gnashing of teeth. You won’t need solitude—or a cast of
thousands, either. Above all, you’ll be free of fear and
desire. And how long your body will contain the soul that
inhabits it will cause you not a moment’s worry. If it’s time
for you to go, leave willingly—as you would to accomplish
anything that can be done with grace and honor. And
concentrate on this, your whole life long: for your mind to be
in the right state—the state a rational, civic mind should be
in.
8. The mind of one set straight and purified: no pus, no dirt,
no scabs.
And not a life cut short by death, like an actor who stops
before the play is done, the plot wound up.
Neither servility nor arrogance. Neither cringing nor
disdain. Neither excuses nor evasions.
9. Your ability to control your thoughts—treat it with respect.
It’s all that protects your mind from false perceptions—false
to your nature, and that of all rational beings. It’s what makes
thoughtfulness possible, and affection for other people, and
submission to the divine.
10. Forget everything else. Keep hold of this alone and
remember it: Each of us lives only now, this brief instant.
The rest has been lived already, or is impossible to see. The
span we live is small—small as the corner of the earth in
which we live it. Small as even the greatest renown, passed
from mouth to mouth by short-lived stick figures, ignorant
alike of themselves and those long dead.
11. To the stand-bys above, add this one: always to define
whatever it is we perceive—to trace its outline—so we can
see what it really is: its substance. Stripped bare. As a
whole. Unmodified. And to call it by its name—the thing
itself and its components, to which it will eventually return.
Nothing is so conducive to spiritual growth as this capacity
for logical and accurate analysis of everything that happens
to us. To look at it in such a way that we understand what
need it fulfills, and in what kind of world. And its value to
that world as a whole and to man in particular—as a citizen
of that higher city, of which all other cities are mere
households.
What is it—this thing that now forces itself on my notice?
What is it made up of? How long was it designed to last?
And what qualities do I need to bring to bear on it—
tranquillity, courage, honesty, trustworthiness,
straightforwardness, independence or what?
So in each case you need to say: “This is due to God.” Or:
“This is due to the interweavings and intertwinings of fate, to
coincidence or chance.” Or: “This is due to a human being.
Someone of the same race, the same birth, the same society,
but who doesn’t know what nature requires of him. But I do.
And so I’ll treat them as the law that binds us—the law of
nature—requires. With kindness and with justice.
And in inconsequential things? I’ll do my best to treat them
as they deserve.”
12. If you do the job in a principled way, with diligence,
energy and patience, if you keep yourself free of distractions,
and keep the spirit inside you undamaged, as if you might
have to give it back at any moment—
If you can embrace this without fear or expectation—can
find fulfillment in what you’re doing now, as Nature
intended, and in superhuman truthfulness (every word, every
utterance)—then your life will be happy.
No one can prevent that.
13. Doctors keep their scalpels and other instruments handy,
for emergencies. Keep your philosophy ready too—ready to
understand heaven and earth. In everything you do, even the
smallest thing, remember the chain that links them. Nothing
earthly succeeds by ignoring heaven, nothing heavenly by
ignoring the earth.
14. Stop drifting. You’re not going to re-read your Brief
Comments, your Deeds of the Ancient Greeks and Romans,
the commonplace books you saved for your old age. Sprint
for the finish. Write off your hopes, and if your well-being
matters to you, be your own savior while you can.
15. They don’t realize how much is included in stealing,
sowing, buying, resting, seeing to business (not with the
eyes, but another kind of sight).
16. Body. Soul. Mind.
Sensations: the body.
Desires: the soul.
Reasoning: the mind.
To experience sensations: even grazing beasts do that. To
let your desires control you: even wild animals do that—and
rutting humans, and tyrants (from Phalaris to Nero . . .).
To make your mind your guide to what seems best: even
people who deny the gods do that. Even people who betray
their country. Even people who do <. . .> behind closed
doors.
If all the rest is common coin, then what is unique to the
good man?
To welcome with affection what is sent by fate. Not to
stain or disturb the spirit within him with a mess of false
beliefs. Instead, to preserve it faithfully, by calmly obeying
God—saying nothing untrue, doing nothing unjust. And if the
others don’t acknowledge it—this life lived with simplicity,
humility, cheerfulness—he doesn’t resent them for it, and
isn’t deterred from following the road where it leads: to the
end of life. An end to be approached in purity, in serenity, in
acceptance, in peaceful unity with what must be.
Book 4
1. Our inward power, when it obeys nature, reacts to events
by accommodating itself to what it faces—to what is
possible. It needs no specific material. It pursues its own
aims as circumstances allow; it turns obstacles into fuel. As
a fire overwhelms what would have quenched a lamp. What’s thrown on top of the conflagration is absorbed,
consumed by it—and makes it burn still higher.
2. No random actions, none not based on underlying
principles.
3. People try to get away from it all—to the country, to the
beach, to the mountains. You always wish that you could too. Which is idiotic: you can get away from it anytime you like.
By going within.
Nowhere you can go is more peaceful—more free of
interruptions—than your own soul. Especially if you have
other things to rely on. An instant’s recollection and there it
is: complete tranquillity. And by tranquillity I mean a kind of
harmony.
So keep getting away from it all—like that. Renew
yourself. But keep it brief and basic. A quick visit should be
enough to ward off all < . . . > and send you back ready to
face what awaits you.
What’s there to complain about? People’s misbehavior?
But take into consideration:
• that rational beings exist for one another;
• that doing what’s right sometimes requires patience;
• that no one does the wrong thing deliberately;
• and the number of people who have feuded and envied
and hated and fought and died and been buried.
. . . and keep your mouth shut.
Or are you complaining about the things the world assigns
you? But consider the two options: Providence or atoms.
And all the arguments for seeing the world as a city.
Or is it your body? Keep in mind that when the mind
detaches itself and realizes its own nature, it no longer has
anything to do with ordinary life—the rough and the smooth,
either one. And remember all you’ve been taught—and
accepted—about pain and pleasure.
Or is it your reputation that’s bothering you? But look at
how soon we’re all forgotten. The abyss of endless time that
swallows it all. The emptiness of all those applauding hands.
The people who praise us—how capricious they are, how
arbitrary. And the tiny region in which it all takes place. The
whole earth a point in space—and most of it uninhabited.
How many people there will be to admire you, and who they
are.
So keep this refuge in mind: the back roads of your self.
Above all, no strain and no stress. Be straightforward. Look
at things like a man, like a human being, like a citizen, like a
mortal. And among the things you turn to, these two:
i. That things have no hold on the soul. They stand there
unmoving, outside it. Disturbance comes only from
within—from our own perceptions.
ii. That everything you see will soon alter and cease to
exist. Think of how many changes you’ve already seen.
“The world is nothing but change. Our life is only
perception.”
4. If thought is something we share, then so is reason—what
makes us reasoning beings.
If so, then the reason that tells us what to do and what not
to do is also shared.
And if so, we share a common law.
And thus, are fellow citizens.
And fellow citizens of something.
And in that case, our state must be the world. What other
entity could all of humanity belong to? And from it—from
this state that we share—come thought and reason and law.
Where else could they come from? The earth that
composes me derives from earth, the water from some other
element, the air from its own source, the heat and fire from
theirs—since nothing comes from nothing, or returns to it.
So thought must derive from somewhere else as well.
5. Death: something like birth, a natural mystery, elements
that split and recombine.
Not an embarrassing thing. Not an offense to reason, or our
nature.
6. That sort of person is bound to do that. You might as well
resent a fig tree for secreting juice. (Anyway, before very
long you’ll both be dead—dead and soon forgotten.)
7. Choose not to be harmed—and you won’t feel harmed.
Don’t feel harmed—and you haven’t been.
8. It can ruin your life only if it ruins your character.
Otherwise it cannot harm you—inside or out.
9. It was for the best. So Nature had no choice but to do it.
10. That every event is the right one. Look closely and you’ll
see.
Not just the right one overall, but right. As if someone had
weighed it out with scales.
Keep looking closely like that, and embody it in your
actions: goodness—what defines a good person.
Keep to it in everything you do.
11. Not what your enemy sees and hopes that you will, but
what’s really there.
12. Two kinds of readiness are constantly needed: (i) to do
only what the logos of authority and law directs, with the
good of human beings in mind; (ii) to reconsider your
position, when someone can set you straight or convert you to
his. But your conversion should always rest on a conviction
that it’s right, or benefits others—nothing else. Not because
it’s more appealing or more popular.
13. You have a mind?
—Yes.
Well, why not use it? Isn’t that all you want—for it to do
its job?
14. You have functioned as a part of something; you will
vanish into what produced you.
Or be restored, rather.
To the logos from which all things spring.
By being changed.
15. Many lumps of incense on the same altar. One crumbles
now, one later, but it makes no difference.
16. Now they see you as a beast, a monkey. But in a week
they’ll think you’re a god—if you rediscover your beliefs
and honor the logos.
17. Not to live as if you had endless years ahead of you.
Death overshadows you. While you’re alive and able—be
good.
18. The tranquillity that comes when you stop caring what
they say. Or think, or do. Only what you do. (Is this fair? Is
this the right thing to do?)
< . . . > not to be distracted by their darkness. To run
straight for the finish line, unswerving.
19. People who are excited by posthumous fame forget that
the people who remember them will soon die too. And those
after them in turn. Until their memory, passed from one to
another like a candle flame, gutters and goes out.
But suppose that those who remembered you were
immortal and your memory undying. What good would it do
you? And I don’t just mean when you’re dead, but in your
own lifetime. What use is praise, except to make your
lifestyle a little more comfortable?
“ You’re out of step—neglecting the gifts of nature to hand
on someone’s words in the future. “
20. Beautiful things of any kind are beautiful in themselves
and sufficient to themselves. Praise is extraneous. The object
of praise remains what it was—no better and no worse. This
applies, I think, even to “beautiful” things in ordinary life—
physical objects, artworks.
Does anything genuinely beautiful need supplementing? No
more than justice does—or truth, or kindness, or humility.
Are any of those improved by being praised? Or damaged by
contempt? Is an emerald suddenly flawed if no one admires
it? Or gold, or ivory, or purple? Lyres? Knives? Flowers?
Bushes?
21. If our souls survive, how does the air find room for them —all of them—since the beginning of time?
How does the earth find room for all the bodies buried in
it since the beginning of time? They linger for whatever
length of time, and then, through change and decomposition, make room for others. So too with the souls that inhabit the
air. They linger a little, and then are changed—diffused and
kindled into fire, absorbed into the logos from which all
things spring, and so make room for new arrivals.
One possible answer.
But we shouldn’t think only of the mass of buried bodies.
There are the ones consumed, on a daily basis, by us and by
other animals. How many are swallowed up like that,
entombed in the bodies of those nourished by them, and yet
there is room for them all—converted into flesh and blood,
transformed to air and fire.
How is the truth of this determined?
Through analysis: material and cause.
22. Not to be driven this way and that, but always to behave
with justice and see things as they are.
23. To the world: Your harmony is mine. Whatever time you
choose is the right time. Not late, not early.
To nature: What the turn of your seasons brings me falls
like ripe fruit. All things are born from you, exist in you,
return to you.
The poet says “dear city of Cecrops . . .” Can’t you bring
yourself to say “of Zeus”?
24. “If you seek tranquillity, do less.” Or (more accurately)
do what’s essential—what the logos of a social being
requires, and in the requisite way. Which brings a double
satisfaction: to do less, better.
Because most of what we say and do is not essential. If
you can eliminate it, you’ll have more time, and more
tranquillity. Ask yourself at every moment, “Is this
necessary?”
But we need to eliminate unnecessary assumptions as
well. To eliminate the unnecessary actions that follow.
25. And then you might see what the life of the good man is
like—someone content with what nature assigns him, and
satisfied with being just and kind himself.
26. You’ve seen that. Now look at this.
Don’t be disturbed. Uncomplicate yourself.
Someone has done wrong . . . to himself.
Something happens to you. Good. It was meant for you by
nature, woven into the pattern from the beginning.
Life is short. That’s all there is to say. Get what you can
from the present—thoughtfully, justly.
Unrestrained moderation.
27. An ordered world or a mishmash. But still an order. Can
there be order within you and not in everything else? In
things so different, so dispersed, so intertwined?
28. Character: dark, womanish, obstinate. Wolf, sheep, child,
fool, cheat, buffoon, salesman, tyrant.
29. Alien: (n.) one who doesn’t know what the world
contains. Or how it operates.
Fugitive: (n.) one who evades his obligations to others.
Blind: (adj.) one who keeps the eyes of his mind shut tight.
Poor: (adj.) requiring others; not having the necessities of
life in one’s own possession.
Rebel: (n.) one who is rebellious, one who withdraws
from the logos of Nature because he resents its workings. (It
produced you; now it produces this.)
Schismatic: (n.) one who separates his own soul from
others with the logos. They should be one.
30. A philosopher without clothes and one without books. “I
have nothing to eat,” says he, as he stands there half-naked,
“but I subsist on the logos.” And with nothing to read, I
subsist on it too.
31. Love the discipline you know, and let it support you.
Entrust everything willingly to the gods, and then make your
way through life—no one’s master and no one’s slave.
32. The age of Vespasian, for example. People doing the
exact same things: marrying, raising children, getting sick,
dying, waging war, throwing parties, doing business,
farming, flattering, boasting, distrusting, plotting, hoping
others will die, complaining about their own lives, falling in
love, putting away money, seeking high office and power.
And that life they led is nowhere to be found.
Or the age of Trajan. The exact same things. And that life
too—gone.
Survey the records of other eras. And see how many others
gave their all and soon died and decomposed into the
elements that formed them.
But most of all, run through the list of those you knew
yourself. Those who worked in vain, who failed to do what
they should have—what they should have remained fixed on
and found satisfaction in.
A key point to bear in mind: The value of attentiveness
varies in proportion to its object. You’re better off not giving
the small things more time than they deserve.
33. Words once in common use now sound archaic. And the
names of the famous dead as well: Camillus, Caeso, Volesus,
Dentatus . . . Scipio and Cato . . . Augustus . . . Hadrian and
Antoninus, and . . .
Everything fades so quickly, turns into legend, and soon
oblivion covers it.
And those are the ones who shone. The rest—“unknown,
unasked-for” a minute after death. What is “eternal” fame?
Emptiness.
Then what should we work for?
Only this: proper understanding; unselfish action; truthful
speech. A resolve to accept whatever happens as necessary
and familiar, flowing like water from that same source and
spring.
34. Hand yourself over to Clotho voluntarily, and let her spin
you into whatever she pleases.
35. Everything transitory—the knower and the known.
36. Constant awareness that everything is born from change.
The knowledge that there is nothing nature loves more than to
alter what exists and make new things like it. All that exists
is the seed of what will emerge from it. You think the only
seeds are the ones that make plants or children? Go deeper.
37. On the verge of dying and still weighed down, still
turbulent, still convinced external things can harm you, still
rude to other people, still not acknowledging the truth: that
wisdom is justice.
38. Look into their minds, at what the wise do and what they
don’t.
39. Nothing that goes on in anyone else’s mind can harm you.
Nor can the shifts and changes in the world around you.
—Then where is harm to be found?
In your capacity to see it. Stop doing that and everything
will be fine. Let the part of you that makes that judgment keep
quiet even if the body it’s attached to is stabbed or burnt, or
stinking with pus, or consumed by cancer. Or to put it another
way: It needs to realize that what happens to everyone—bad
and good alike—is neither good nor bad. That what happens
in every life—lived naturally or not—is neither natural nor
unnatural.
40. The world as a living being—one nature, one soul. Keep
that in mind. And how everything feeds into that single
experience, moves with a single motion. And how everything
helps produce everything else. Spun and woven together.
41. “A little wisp of soul carrying a corpse.”—Epictetus.
42. There is nothing bad in undergoing change—or good in
emerging from it.
43. Time is a river, a violent current of events, glimpsed
once and already carried past us, and another follows and is
gone.
44. Everything that happens is as simple and familiar as the
rose in spring, the fruit in summer: disease, death,
blasphemy, conspiracy . . . everything that makes stupid
people happy or angry.
45. What follows coheres with what went before. Not like a
random catalogue whose order is imposed upon it arbitrarily,
but logically connected. And just as what exists is ordered
and harmonious, what comes into being betrays an order too.
Not a mere sequence, but an astonishing concordance.
46. Remember Heraclitus: “When earth dies, it becomes
water; water, air; air, fire; and back to the beginning.”
“Those who have forgotten where the road leads.”
“They are at odds with what is all around them”—the alldirecting
logos. And “they find alien what they meet with
every day.”
“Our words and actions should not be like those of
sleepers” (for we act and speak in dreams as well) “or of
children copying their parents”—doing and saying only what
we have been told.
47. Suppose that a god announced that you were going to die
tomorrow “or the day after.” Unless you were a complete
coward you wouldn’t kick up a fuss about which day it was —what difference could it make? Now recognize that the
difference between years from now and tomorrow is just as
small.
48. Don’t let yourself forget how many doctors have died,
after furrowing their brows over how many deathbeds. How
many astrologers, after pompous forecasts about others’
ends. How many philosophers, after endless disquisitions on
death and immortality. How many warriors, after inflicting
thousands of casualties themselves. How many tyrants, after
abusing the power of life and death atrociously, as if they
were themselves immortal.
How many whole cities have met their end: Helike,
Pompeii, Herculaneum, and countless others.
And all the ones you know yourself, one after another. One
who laid out another for burial, and was buried himself, and
then the man who buried him—all in the same short space of
time.
In short, know this: Human lives are brief and trivial.
Yesterday a blob of semen; tomorrow embalming fluid, ash.
To pass through this brief life as nature demands. To give
it upwithout complaint.
Like an olive that ripens and falls.
Praising its mother, thanking the tree it grew on.
49. To be like the rock that the waves keep crashing over. It
stands unmoved and the raging of the sea falls still around it.
49a. —It’s unfortunate that this has happened.
No. It’s fortunate that this has happened and I’ve remained
unharmed by it—not shattered by the present or frightened of
the future. It could have happened to anyone. But not
everyone could have remained unharmed by it. Why treat the
one as a misfortune rather than the other as fortunate? Can
you really call something a misfortune that doesn’t violate
human nature? Or do you think something that’s not against
nature’s will can violate it? But you know what its will is.
Does what’s happened keep you from acting with justice,
generosity, self-control, sanity, prudence, honesty, humility,
straightforwardness, and all the other qualities that allow a
person’s nature to fulfill itself?
So remember this principle when something threatens to
cause you pain: the thing itself was no misfortune at all; to
endure it and prevail is great good fortune.
50. A trite but effective tactic against the fear of death: think
of the list of people who had to be pried away from life. What did they gain by dying old? In the end, they all sleep six
feet under—Caedicianus, Fabius, Julian, Lepidus, and all the
rest. They buried their contemporaries, and were buried in
turn.
Our lifetime is so brief. And to live it out in these
circumstances, among these people, in this body? Nothing to
get excited about. Consider the abyss of time past, the infinite
future. Three days of life or three generations: what’s the
difference?
51. Take the shortest route, the one that nature planned—to
speak and act in the healthiest way. Do that, and be free of
pain and stress, free of all calculation and pretension.
Book 5
1. At dawn, when you have trouble getting out of bed, tell
yourself: “I have to go to work—as a human being. What do I
have to complain of, if I’m going to do what I was born for—
the things I was brought into the world to do? Or is this what
I was created for? To huddle under the blankets and stay
warm?
—But it’s nicer here. . . .
So you were born to feel “nice”? Instead of doing things
and experiencing them? Don’t you see the plants, the birds,
the ants and spiders and bees going about their individual
tasks, putting the world in order, as best they can? And
you’re not willing to do your job as a human being? Why
aren’t you running to do what your nature demands?
—But we have to sleep sometime. . . .
Agreed. But nature set a limit on that—as it did on eating
and drinking. And you’re over the limit. You’ve had more
than enough of that. But not of working. There you’re still
below your quota.
You don’t love yourself enough. Or you’d love your nature
too, and what it demands of you. People who love what they
do wear themselves down doing it, they even forget to wash
or eat. Do you have less respect for your own nature than the
engraver does for engraving, the dancer for the dance, the
miser for money or the social climber for status? When
they’re really possessed by what they do, they’d rather stop
eating and sleeping than give up practicing their arts.
Is helping others less valuable to you? Not worth your
effort?
2.To shrug it all off and wipe it clean—every annoyance and
distraction—and reach utter stillness.
Child’s play.
3. If an action or utterance is appropriate, then it’s
appropriate for you. Don’t be put off by other people’s
comments and criticism. If it’s right to say or do it, then it’s
the right thing for you to do or say.
The others obey their own lead, follow their own
impulses. Don’t be distracted. Keep walking. Follow your
own nature, and follow Nature—along the road they share.
4. I walk through what is natural, until the time comes to sink
down and rest. To entrust my last breath to the source of my
daily breathing, fall on the source of my father’s seed, of my
mother’s blood, of my nurse’s milk. Of my daily food and
drink through all these years. What sustains my footsteps, and
the use I make of it—the many uses.
5. No one could ever accuse you of being quick-witted.
All right, but there are plenty of other things you can’t
claim you “haven’t got in you.” Practice the virtues you can
show: honesty, gravity, endurance, austerity, resignation,
abstinence, patience, sincerity, moderation, seriousness,
high-mindedness. Don’t you see how much you have to offer —beyond excuses like “can’t”? And yet you still settle for
less.
Or is it some inborn condition that makes you whiny and
grasping and obsequious, makes you complain about your
body and curry favor and show off and leaves you so
turbulent inside?
No. You could have broken free a long way back. And
then you would have been only a little slow. “Not so quick
on the uptake.”
And you need to work on that as well—that slowness. Not
something to be ignored, let alone to prize.
6. Some people, when they do someone a favor, are always
looking for a chance to call it in. And some aren’t, but
they’re still aware of it—still regard it as a debt. But others
don’t even do that. They’re like a vine that produces grapes
without looking for anything in return.
A horse at the end of the race . . .
A dog when the hunt is over . . .
A bee with its honey stored . . .
And a human being after helping others.
They don’t make a fuss about it. They just go on to
something else, as the vine looks forward to bearing fruit
again in season.
We should be like that. Acting almost unconsciously.
—Yes. Except conscious of it. Because it’s characteristic
of social beings that they see themselves as acting socially.
And expect their neighbors to see it too!
That’s true. But you’re misunderstanding me. You’ll wind
up like the people I mentioned before, misled by plausible
reasoning. But if you make an effort to understand what I’m
saying, then you won’t need to worry about neglecting your
social duty.
7. Prayer of the Athenians:
Zeus, rain down, rain down
On the land and fields of Athens.
Either no prayers at all—or one as straightforward as that.
8. Just as you overhear people saying that “the doctor
prescribed such-and-such for him” (like riding, or cold
baths, or walking barefoot . . .), say this: “Nature prescribed
illness for him.” Or blindness. Or the loss of a limb. Or
whatever. There “prescribed” means something like
“ordered, so as to further his recovery.” And so too here. What happens to each of us is ordered. It furthers our destiny.
And when we describe things as “taking place,” we’re
talking like builders, who say that blocks in a wall or a
pyramid “take their place” in the structure, and fit together in
a harmonious pattern.
For there is a single harmony. Just as the world forms a
single body comprising all bodies, so fate forms a single
purpose, comprising all purposes. Even complete illiterates
acknowledge it when they say that something “brought on”
this or that. Brought on, yes. Or prescribed it. And in that
case, let’s accept it—as we accept what the doctor
prescribes. It may not always be pleasant, but we embrace it —because we want to get well. Look at the accomplishment
of nature’s plans in that light—the way you look at your own
health—and accept what happens (even if it seems hard to
accept). Accept it because of what it leads to: the good
health of the world, and the well-being and prosperity of
Zeus himself, who would not have brought this on anyone
unless it brought benefit to the world as a whole. No nature
would do that—bring something about that wasn’t beneficial
to what it governed.
So there are two reasons to embrace what happens. One is
that it’s happening to you. It was prescribed for you, and it
pertains to you. The thread was spun long ago, by the oldest
cause of all.
The other reason is that what happens to an individual is a
cause of well-being in what directs the world—of its wellbeing,
its fulfillment, of its very existence, even. Because the
whole is damaged if you cut away anything—anything at all —from its continuity and its coherence. Not only its parts,
but its purposes. And that’s what you’re doing when you
complain: hacking and destroying.
9. Not to feel exasperated, or defeated, or despondent
because your days aren’t packed with wise and moral
actions. But to get back up when you fail, to celebrate
behaving like a human—however imperfectly—and fully
embrace the pursuit that you’ve embarked on.
And not to think of philosophy as your instructor, but as the
sponge and egg white that relieve ophthalmia—as a soothing
ointment, a warm lotion. Not showing off your obedience to
the logos, but resting in it. Remember: philosophy requires
only what your nature already demands. What you’ve been
after is something else again—something unnatural.
—But what could be preferable?
That’s exactly how pleasure traps us, isn’t it? Wouldn’t
magnanimity be preferable? Or freedom? Honesty?
Prudence? Piety? And is there anything preferable to thought
itself—to logic, to understanding? Think of their
surefootedness. Their fluent stillness.
10. Things are wrapped in such a veil of mystery that many
good philosophers have found it impossible to make sense of
them. Even the Stoics have trouble. Any assessment we make
is subject to alteration—just as we are ourselves.
Look closely at them—how impermanent they are, how
meaningless. Things that a pervert can own, a whore, a thief.
Then look at the way the people around you behave. Even
the best of them are hard to put up with—not to mention
putting up with yourself. In such deep darkness, such a sewer —in the flux of material, of time, of motion and things moved —I don’t know what there is to value or to work for.
Quite the contrary. We need to comfort ourselves and wait
for dissolution. And not get impatient in the meantime, but
take refuge in these two things:
i. Nothing can happen to me that isn’t natural.
ii. I can keep from doing anything that God and my own
spirit don’t approve. No one can force me to.
11. What am I doing with my soul?
Interrogate yourself, to find out what inhabits your socalled
mind and what kind of soul you have now. A child’s
soul, an adolescent’s, a woman’s? A tyrant’s soul? The soul
of a predator—or its prey?
12. Another way to grasp what ordinary people mean by
“goods”:
Suppose you took certain things as touchstones of
goodness: prudence, self-control, justice, and courage, say. If
you understood “goods” as meaning those, you wouldn’t be
able to follow that line about “so many goods. . . .” It
wouldn’t make any sense to you. Whereas if you’d
internalized the conventional meaning, you’d be able to
follow it perfectly. You’d have no trouble seeing the author’s
meaning and why it was funny.
Which shows that most people do acknowledge a
distinction. Otherwise we wouldn’t recognize the first sense
as jarring and reject it automatically, whereas we accept the
second—the one referring to wealth and the benefits of
celebrity and high living—as amusing and apropos.
Now go a step further. Ask yourself whether we should
accept as goods—and should value—the things we have to
think of to have the line make sense—the ones whose
abundance leaves their owner with “. . . no place to shit.”
13. I am made up of substance and what animates it, and
neither one can ever stop existing, any more than it began to.
Every portion of me will be reassigned as another portion of
the world, and that in turn transformed into another. Ad
infinitum.
I was produced through one such transformation, and my
parents too, and so on back. Ad infinitum.
N.B.: Still holds good, even if the world goes through
recurrent cycles.
14. The logos and its employment are forces sufficient for
themselves and for their works. They start from their own
beginning, they proceed to the appointed end. We call such
activities “directed,” from the directness of their course.
15. Nothing pertains to human beings except what defines us
as human. No other things can be demanded of us. They
aren’t proper to human nature, nor is it incomplete without
them. It follows that they are not our goal, or what helps us
reach it—the good. If any of them were proper to us, it would
be improper to disdain or resist it. Nor would we admire
people who show themselves immune to it. If the things
themselves were good, it could hardly be good to give them
up. But in reality the more we deny ourselves such things
(and things like them)—or are deprived of them
involuntarily, even—the better we become.
16. The things you think about determine the quality of your
mind. Your soul takes on the color of your thoughts. Color it
with a run of thoughts like these:
i. Anywhere you can lead your life, you can lead a good
one.
—Lives are led at court. . . .
Then good ones can be.
ii. Things gravitate toward what they were intended for.
What things gravitate toward is their goal.
A thing’s goal is what benefits it—its good.
A rational being’s good is unselfishness. What we were
born for. That’s nothing new. Remember? Lower things
for the sake of higher ones, and higher ones for one
another. Things that have consciousness are higher than
those that don’t. And those with the logos still higher.
17. It is crazy to want what is impossible. And impossible
for the wicked not to do so.
18. Nothing happens to anyone that he can’t endure. The same
thing happens to other people, and they weather it unharmed —out of sheer obliviousness or because they want to display
“character.” Is wisdom really so much weaker than
ignorance and vanity?
19. Things have no hold on the soul. They have no access to
it, cannot move or direct it. It is moved and directed by itself
alone. It takes the things before it and interprets them as it
sees fit.
20. In a sense, people are our proper occupation. Our job is
to do them good and put up with them.
But when they obstruct our proper tasks, they become
irrelevant to us—like sun, wind, animals. Our actions may be
impeded by them, but there can be no impeding our intentions
or our dispositions. Because we can accommodate and
adapt. The mind adapts and converts to its own purposes the
obstacle to our acting.
The impediment to action advances action.
What stands in the way becomes the way.
21. Honor that which is greatest in the world—that on whose
business all things are employed and by whom they are
governed.
And honor what is greatest in yourself: the part that shares
its nature with that power. All things—in you as well—are
employed about its business, and your life is governed by it.
22. If it does not harm the community, it does not harm its
members.
When you think you’ve been injured, apply this rule: If the
community isn’t injured by it, neither am I. And if it is, anger
is not the answer. Show the offender where he went wrong.
23. Keep in mind how fast things pass by and are gone—
those that are now, and those to come. Existence flows past
us like a river: the “what” is in constant flux, the “why” has a
thousand variations. Nothing is stable, not even what’s right
here. The infinity of past and future gapes before us—a
chasm whose depths we cannot see.
So it would take an idiot to feel self-importance or
distress. Or any indignation, either. As if the things that
irritate us lasted.
24. Remember:
Matter. How tiny your share of it.
Time. How brief and fleeting your allotment of it.
Fate. How small a role you play in it.
25. So other people hurt me? That’s their problem. Their
character and actions are not mine. What is done to me is
ordained by nature, what I do by my own.
26. The mind is the ruler of the soul. It should remain
unstirred by agitations of the flesh—gentle and violent ones
alike. Not mingling with them, but fencing itself off and
keeping those feelings in their place. When they make their
way into your thoughts, through the sympathetic link between
mind and body, don’t try to resist the sensation. The
sensation is natural. But don’t let the mind start in with
judgments, calling it “good” or “bad.”
27. “To live with the gods.” And to do that is to show them
that your soul accepts what it is given and does what the
spirit requires—the spirit God gave each of us to lead and
guide us, a fragment of himself. Which is our mind, our
logos.
28. Don’t be irritated at people’s smell or bad breath. What’s the point? With that mouth, with those armpits,
they’re going to produce that odor.
—But they have a brain! Can’t they figure it out? Can’t
they recognize the problem?
So you have a brain as well. Good for you. Then use your
logic to awaken his. Show him. Make him realize it. If he’ll
listen, then you’ll have solved the problem. Without anger.
28a. Neither player-king nor prostitute.
29. You can live here as you expect to live there.
And if they won’t let you, you can depart life now and
forfeit nothing. If the smoke makes me cough, I can leave. What’s so hard about that?
Until things reach that point, I’m free. No one can keep me
from doing what I want. And I want what is proper to
rational beings, living together.
30. The world’s intelligence is not selfish.
It created lower things for the sake of higher ones, and
attuned the higher ones to one another. Look how it
subordinates, how it connects, how it assigns each thing what
each deserves, and brings the better things into alignment.
31. How have you behaved to the gods, to your parents, to
your siblings, to your wife, to your children, to your teachers,
to your nurses, to your friends, to your relatives, to your
slaves? Have they all had from you nothing “wrong and
unworthy, either word or deed”?
Consider all that you’ve gone through, all that you’ve
survived. And that the story of your life is done, your
assignment complete. How many good things have you seen?
How much pain and pleasure have you resisted? How many
honors have you declined? How many unkind people have
you been kind to?
32. Why do other souls—unskilled, untrained—disturb the
soul with skill and understanding?
—And which is that?
The one that knows the beginning and the end, and knows
the logos that runs through all things and that assigns to all a
place, each in its allotted span, throughout the whole of time.
33. Soon you’ll be ashes, or bones. A mere name, at most—
and even that is just a sound, an echo. The things we want in
life are empty, stale, and trivial. Dogs snarling at each other.
Quarreling children—laughing and then bursting into tears a
moment later. Trust, shame, justice, truth—“gone from the
earth and only found in heaven.”
Why are you still here? Sensory objects are shifting and
unstable; our senses dim and easily deceived; the soul itself a
decoction of the blood; fame in a world like this is
worthless.
—And so?
Wait for it patiently—annihilation or metamorphosis.
—And until that time comes—what?
Honor and revere the gods, treat human beings as they
deserve, be tolerant with others and strict with yourself.
Remember, nothing belongs to you but your flesh and blood
—and nothing else is under your control.
34. You can lead an untroubled life provided you can grow,
can think and act systematically.
Two characteristics shared by gods and men (and every
rational creature):
i. Not to let others hold you back.
ii. To locate goodness in thinking and doing the right
thing, and to limit your desires to that.
35. If:
• this evil is not of my doing,
• nor the result of it,
• and the community is not endangered, why should it
bother me?
Where's the danger for the community?
36. Not to be overwhelmed by what you imagine, but just do
what you can and should. And if < . . . > suffer in
inessentials, not to treat that as a defeat. (Bad habit.)
Like the old man asking for the orphan’s toy on the way out —even though he knew that’s all it was. Like that.
36a. † Up on the platform. †
Have you forgotten what’s what?
—I know, but it was important to them.
And so you have to be an idiot as well?
37. I was once a fortunate man but at some point fortune
abandoned me.
But true good fortune is what you make for yourself. Good
fortune: good character, good intentions, and good actions.
Book 6
1. Nature is pliable, obedient. And the logos that governs it
has no reason to do evil. It knows no evil, does none, and
causes harm to nothing. It dictates all beginnings and all
endings.
2. Just that you do the right thing. The rest doesn’t matter.
Cold or warm.
Tired or well-rested.
Despised or honored.
Dying . . . or busy with other assignments.
Because dying, too, is one of our assignments in life.
There as well: “to do what needs doing.”
3. Look inward. Don’t let the true nature or value of anything
elude you.
4. Before long, all existing things will be transformed, to rise
like smoke (assuming all things become one), or be
dispersed in fragments.
5. The logos knows where it stands, and what it has to do,
and what it has to work with.
6. The best revenge is not to be like that.
7. To move from one unselfish action to another with God in
mind.
Only there, delight and stillness.
8. The mind is that which is roused and directed by itself. It
makes of itself what it chooses. It makes what it chooses of
its own experience.
9. Everything is brought about by nature, not by anything
beyond it, or within it, or apart from it.
10. (i) Mixture, interaction, dispersal; or (ii) unity, order,
design.
Suppose (i): Why would I want to live in disorder and
confusion? Why would I care about anything except the
eventual “dust to dust”? And why would I feel any anxiety?
Dispersal is certain, whatever I do.
Or suppose (ii): Reverence. Serenity. Faith in the power
responsible.
11. When jarred, unavoidably, by circumstances, revert at
once to yourself, and don’t lose the rhythm more than you can
help. You’ll have a better grasp of the harmony if you keep
on going back to it.
12. If you had a stepmother and a real mother, you would pay
your respects to your stepmother, yes . . . but it’s your real
mother you’d go home to.
The court . . . and philosophy: Keep returning to it, to rest
in its embrace. It’s all that makes the court—and you—
endurable.
13. Like seeing roasted meat and other dishes in front of you
and suddenly realizing: This is a dead fish. A dead bird. A
dead pig. Or that this noble vintage is grape juice, and the
purple robes are sheep wool dyed with shellfish blood. Or
making love—something rubbing against your penis, a brief
seizure and a little cloudy liquid.
Perceptions like that—latching onto things and piercing
through them, so we see what they really are. That’s what we
need to do all the time—all through our lives when things lay
claim to our trust—to lay them bare and see how pointless
they are, to strip away the legend that encrusts them.
Pride is a master of deception: when you think you’re
occupied in the weightiest business, that’s when he has you
in his spell.
(Compare Crates on Xenocrates.)
14. Things ordinary people are impressed by fall into the
categories of things that are held together by simple physics
(like stones or wood), or by natural growth (figs, vines,
olives . . .). Those admired by more advanced minds are held
together by a living soul (flocks of sheep, herds of cows).
Still more sophisticated people admire what is guided by a
rational mind—not the universal mind, but one admired for
its technical knowledge, or for some other skill—or just
because it happens to own a lot of slaves.
But those who revere that other mind—the one we all
share, as humans and as citizens—aren’t interested in other
things. Their focus is on the state of their own minds—to
avoid all selfishness and illogic, and to work with others to
achieve that goal.
15. Some things are rushing into existence, others out of it.
Some of what now exists is already gone. Change and flux
constantly remake the world, just as the incessant
progression of time remakes eternity.
We find ourselves in a river. Which of the things around us
should we value when none of them can offer a firm
foothold?
Like an attachment to a sparrow: we glimpse it and it’s
gone.
And life itself: like the decoction of blood, the drawing in
of air. We expel the power of breathing we drew in at birth
(just yesterday or the day before), breathing it out like the air
we exhale at each moment.
16. What is it in ourselves that we should prize?
Not just transpiration (even plants do that).
Or respiration (even beasts and wild animals breathe).
Or being struck by passing thoughts.
Or jerked like a puppet by your own impulses.
Or moving in herds.
Or eating, and relieving yourself afterwards.
Then what is to be prized?
An audience clapping? No. No more than the clacking of
their tongues. Which is all that public praise amounts to—a
clacking of tongues.
So we throw out other people’s recognition. What’s left
for us to prize?
I think it’s this: to do (and not do) what we were designed
for. That’s the goal of all trades, all arts, and what each of
them aims at: that the thing they create should do what it was
designed to do. The nurseryman who cares for the vines, the
horse trainer, the dog breeder—this is what they aim at. And
teaching and education—what else are they trying to
accomplish?
So that’s what we should prize. Hold on to that, and you
won’t be tempted to aim at anything else.
And if you can’t stop prizing a lot of other things? Then
you’ll never be free—free, independent, imperturbable.
Because you’ll always be envious and jealous, afraid that
people might come and take it all away from you. Plotting
against those who have them—those things you prize. People
who need those things are bound to be a mess—and bound to
take out their frustrations on the gods. Whereas to respect
your own mind—to prize it—will leave you satisfied with
your own self, well integrated into your community and in
tune with the gods as well—embracing what they allot you,
and what they ordain.
17. The elements move upward, downward, in all directions.
The motion of virtue is different—deeper. It moves at a
steady pace on a road hard to discern, and always forward.
18. The way people behave. They refuse to admire their
contemporaries, the people whose lives they share. No, but
to be admired by Posterity—people they’ve never met and
never will—that’s what they set their hearts on. You might as
well be upset at not being a hero to your great-grandfather.
19. Not to assume it’s impossible because you find it hard.
But to recognize that if it’s humanly possible, you can do it
too.
20. In the ring, our opponents can gouge us with their nails or
butt us with their heads and leave a bruise, but we don’t
denounce them for it or get upset with them or regard them
from then on as violent types. We just keep an eye on them
after that. Not out of hatred or suspicion. Just keeping a
friendly distance.
We need to do that in other areas. We need to excuse what
our sparring partners do, and just keep our distance—without
suspicion or hatred.
21. If anyone can refute me—show me I’m making a mistake
or looking at things from the wrong perspective—I’ll gladly
change. It’s the truth I’m after, and the truth never harmed
anyone. What harms us is to persist in self-deceit and
ignorance.
22. I do what is mine to do; the rest doesn’t disturb me. The
rest is inanimate, or has no logos, or it wanders at random
and has lost the road.
23. When you deal with irrational animals, with things and
circumstances, be generous and straightforward. You are
rational; they are not. When you deal with fellow human
beings, behave as one. They share in the logos. And invoke
the gods regardless.
Don’t worry about how long you’ll go on doing this.
A single afternoon would be enough.
24. Alexander the Great and his mule driver both died and
the same thing happened to both. They were absorbed alike
into the life force of the world, or dissolved alike into atoms.
25. Think how much is going on inside you every second—in
your soul, in your body. Why should it astonish you that so
much more—everything that happens in that all-embracing
unity, the world—is happening at the same time?
26. If someone asked you how to write your name, would you
clench your teeth and spit out the letters one by one? If he lost
his temper, would you lose yours as well? Or would you just
spell out the individual letters?
Remember—your responsibilities can be broken down
into individual parts as well. Concentrate on those, and finish
the job methodically—without getting stirred up or meeting
anger with anger.
27. How cruel—to forbid people to want what they think is
good for them. And yet that’s just what you won’t let them do
when you get angry at their misbehavior. They’re drawn
toward what they think is good for them.
—But it’s not good for them.
Then show them that. Prove it to them. Instead of losing
your temper.
28. Death. The end of sense-perception, of being controlled
by our emotions, of mental activity, of enslavement to our
bodies.
29. Disgraceful: for the soul to give up when the body is still
going strong.
30. To escape imperialization—that indelible stain. It
happens. Make sure you remain straightforward, upright,
reverent, serious, unadorned, an ally of justice, pious, kind,
affectionate, and doing your duty with a will. Fight to be the
person philosophy tried to make you.
Revere the gods; watch over human beings. Our lives are
short. The only rewards of our existence here are an
unstained character and unselfish acts.
Take Antoninus as your model, always. His energy in
doing what was rational . . . his steadiness in any situation . .
. his sense of reverence . . . his calm expression . . . his
gentleness . . . his modesty . . . his eagerness to grasp things.
And how he never let things go before he was sure he had
examined them thoroughly, understood them perfectly . . . the
way he put up with unfair criticism, without returning it . . .
how he couldn’t be hurried . . . how he wouldn’t listen to
informers . . . how reliable he was as a judge of character,
and of actions . . . not prone to backbiting, or cowardice, or
jealousy, or empty rhetoric . . . content with the basics—in
living quarters, bedding, clothes, food, servants . . . how hard
he worked, how much he put up with . . . his ability to work
straight through till dusk—because of his simple diet (he
didn’t even need to relieve himself, except at set times) . . .
his constancy and reliability as a friend . . . his tolerance of
people who openly questioned his views and his delight at
seeing his ideas improved on . . . his piety—without a trace
of superstition . . .
So that when your time comes, your conscience will be as
clear as his.
31. Awaken; return to yourself. Now, no longer asleep,
knowing they were only dreams, clear-headed again, treat
everything around you as a dream.
32. I am composed of a body and a soul.
Things that happen to the body are meaningless. It cannot
discriminate among them.
Nothing has meaning to my mind except its own actions. Which are within its own control. And it’s only the
immediate ones that matter. Its past and future actions too are
meaningless.
33. It’s normal to feel pain in your hands and feet, if you’re
using your feet as feet and your hands as hands. And for a
human being to feel stress is normal—if he’s living a normal
human life.
And if it’s normal, how can it be bad?
34. Thieves, perverts, parricides, dictators: the kind of
pleasures they enjoy.
35. Have you noticed how professionals will meet the man
on the street halfway but without compromising the logos of
their trade? Should we as humans feel less responsibility to
our logos than builders or pharmacists do? A logos we share
with the divine?
36. Asia and Europe: distant recesses of the universe.
The ocean: a drop of water.
Mount Athos: a molehill.
The present: a split second in eternity.
Minuscule, transitory, insignificant.
36a. Everything derives from it—that universal mind—either
as effect or consequence. The lion’s jaws, the poisonous
substances, and every harmful thing—from thorns to mud . . .
are by-products of the good and beautiful. So don’t look at
them as alien to what you revere, but focus on the source that
all things spring from.
37. If you’ve seen the present then you’ve seen everything—
as it’s been since the beginning, as it will be forever. The
same substance, the same form. All of it.
38. Keep reminding yourself of the way things are connected,
of their relatedness. All things are implicated in one another
and in sympathy with each other. This event is the
consequence of some other one. Things push and pull on each
other, and breathe together, and are one.
39. The things ordained for you—teach yourself to be at one
with those. And the people who share them with you—treat
them with love.
With real love.
40. Implements, tools, equipment. If they do what they were
designed for, then they work. Even if the person who
designed them is miles away.
But with naturally occurring things, the force that designed
them is present within them and remains there. Which is why
we owe it special reverence, with the recognition that if you
live and act as it dictates, then everything in you is
intelligently ordered. Just as everything in the world is.
41. You take things you don’t control and define them as
“good” or “bad.” And so of course when the “bad” things
happen, or the “good” ones don’t, you blame the gods and
feel hatred for the people responsible—or those you decide
to make responsible. Much of our bad behavior stems from
trying to apply those criteria. If we limited “good” and “bad”
to our own actions, we’d have no call to challenge God, or to
treat other people as enemies.
42. All of us are working on the same project. Some
consciously, with understanding; some without knowing it. (I
think this is what Heraclitus meant when he said that “those
who sleep are also hard at work”—that they too collaborate
in what happens.) Some of us work in one way, and some in
others. And those who complain and try to obstruct and
thwart things—they help as much as anyone. The world
needs them as well.
So make up your mind who you’ll choose to work with.
The force that directs all things will make good use of you
regardless—will put you on its payroll and set you to work.
But make sure it’s not the job Chrysippus speaks of: the bad
line in the play, put there for laughs.
43. Does the sun try to do the rain’s work? Or Asclepius
Demeter’s? And what about each of the stars—different, yet
working in common?
44. If the gods have made decisions about me and the things
that happen to me, then they were good decisions. (It’s hard
to picture a god who makes bad ones.) And why would they
expend their energies on causing me harm? What good would
it do them—or the world, which is their primary concern?
And if they haven’t made decisions about me as an
individual, they certainly have about the general welfare.
And anything that follows from that is something I have to
welcome and embrace.
And if they make no decisions, about anything—and it’s
blasphemous even to think so (because if so, then let’s stop
sacrificing, praying, swearing oaths, and doing all the other
things we do, believing the whole time that the gods are right
here with us)—if they decide nothing about our lives . . .
well, I can still make decisions. Can still consider what it’s
to my benefit to do. And what benefits anyone is to do what
his own nature requires. And mine is rational. Rational and
civic.
My city and state are Rome—as Antoninus. But as a human
being? The world. So for me, “good” can only mean what’s
good for both communities.
45. Whatever happens to you is for the good of the world.
That would be enough right there. But if you look closely
you’ll generally notice something else as well: whatever
happens to a single person is for the good of others. (Good in
the ordinary sense—as the world defines it.)
46. Just as the arena and the other spectacles weary you—
you’ve seen them all before—and the repetition grates on
your nerves, so too with life. The same things, the same
causes, on all sides.
How much longer?
47. Keep this constantly in mind: that all sorts of people have
died—all professions, all nationalities. Follow the thought
all the way down to Philistion, Phoebus, and Origanion. Now
extend it to other species.
We have to go there too, where all of them have already
gone:
. . . the eloquent and the wise—Heraclitus, Pythagoras,
Socrates . . .
. . . the heroes of old, the soldiers and kings who followed
them . . .
. . . Eudoxus, Hipparchus, Archimedes . . .
. . . the smart, the generous, the hardworking, the cunning,
the selfish . . .
. . . and even Menippus and his cohorts, who laughed at
thewhole brief, fragile business.
All underground for a long time now.
And what harm does it do them? Or the others either—the
ones whose names we don’t even know?
The only thing that isn’t worthless: to live this life out
truthfully and rightly. And be patient with those who don’t.
48. When you need encouragement, think of the qualities the
people around you have: this one’s energy, that one’s
modesty, another’s generosity, and so on. Nothing is as
encouraging as when virtues are visibly embodied in the
people around us, when we’re practically showered with
them.
It’s good to keep this in mind.
49. It doesn’t bother you that you weigh only x or y pounds
and not three hundred. Why should it bother you that you have
only x or y years to live and not more? You accept the limits
placed on your body. Accept those placed on your time.
50. Do your best to convince them. But act on your own, if
justice requires it. If met with force, then fall back on
acceptance and peaceability. Use the setback to practice
other virtues.
Remember that our efforts are subject to circumstances;
you weren’t aiming to do the impossible.
—Aiming to do what, then?
To try. And you succeeded. What you set out to do is
accomplished.
51. Ambition means tying your well-being to what other
people say or do.
Self-indulgence means tying it to the things that happen to
you.
Sanity means tying it to your own actions.
52. You don’t have to turn this into something. It doesn’t
have to upset you. Things can’t shape our decisions by
themselves.
53. Practice really hearing what people say. Do your best to
get inside their minds.
54. What injures the hive injures the bee.
55. If the crew talked back to the captain, or patients to their
doctor, then whose authority would they accept? How could
the passengers be kept safe or the patient healthy?
56. All those people who came into the world with me and
have already left it.
57. Honey tastes bitter to a man with jaundice. People with
rabies are terrified of water. And a child’s idea of beauty is
a ball. Why does that upset you? Do you think falsehood is
less powerful than bile or a rabid dog?
58. No one can keep you from living as your nature requires.
Nothing can happen to you that is not required by Nature.
59. The people they want to ingratiate themselves with, and
the results, and the things they do in the process. How
quickly it will all be erased by time. How much has been
erased already.
Book 7
1. Evil: the same old thing.
No matter what happens, keep this in mind: It’s the same
old thing, from one end of the world to the other. It fills the
history books, ancient and modern, and the cities, and the
houses too. Nothing new at all.
Familiar, transient.
2. You cannot quench understanding unless you put out the
insights that compose it. But you can rekindle those at will,
like glowing coals. I can control my thoughts as necessary;
then how can I be troubled? What is outside my mind means
nothing to it. Absorb that lesson and your feet stand firm.
You can return to life. Look at things as you did before.
And life returns.
3. Pointless bustling of processions, opera arias, herds of
sheep and cattle, military exercises. A bone flung to pet
poodles, a little food in the fish tank. The miserable
servitude of ants, scampering of frightened mice, puppets
jerked on strings.
Surrounded as we are by all of this, we need to practice
acceptance. Without disdain. But remembering that our own
worth is measured by what we devote our energy to.
4. Focus on what is said when you speak and on what results
from each action. Know what the one aims at, and what the
other means.
5. Is my intellect up to this? If so, then I’ll put it to work, like
a tool provided by nature. And if it isn’t, then I’ll turn the job
over to someone who can do better—unless I have no choice.
Or I do the best I can with it, and collaborate with
whoever can make use of it, to do what the community needs
done. Because whatever I do—alone or with others—can
aim at one thing only: what squares with those requirements.
6. So many who were remembered already forgotten, and
those who remembered them long gone.
7. Don’t be ashamed to need help. Like a soldier storming a
wall, you have a mission to accomplish. And if you’ve been
wounded and you need a comrade to pull you up? So what?
8. Forget the future. When and if it comes, you’ll have the
same resources to draw on—the same logos.
9. Everything is interwoven, and the web is holy; none of its
parts are unconnected. They are composed harmoniously, and
together they compose the world.
One world, made up of all things.
One divinity, present in them all.
One substance and one law—the logos that all rational
beings share.
And one truth . . .
If this is indeed the culmination of one process, beings
who share the same birth, the same logos.
10. All substance is soon absorbed into nature, all that
animates it soon restored to the logos, all trace of them both
soon covered over by time.
11. To a being with logos, an unnatural action is one that
conflicts with the logos.
12. Straight, not straightened.
13. What is rational in different beings is related, like the
individual limbs of a single being, and meant to function as a
unit.
This will be clearer to you if you remind yourself: I am a
single limb (melos) of a larger body—a rational one.
Or you could say “a part” (meros)—only a letter’s
difference. But then you’re not really embracing other
people. Helping them isn’t yet its own reward. You’re still
seeing it only as The Right Thing To Do. You don’t yet
realize who you’re really helping.
14. Let it happen, if it wants, to whatever it can happen to.
And what’s affected can complain about it if it wants. It
doesn’t hurt me unless I interpret its happening as harmful to
me. I can choose not to.
15. No matter what anyone says or does, my task is to be
good. Like gold or emerald or purple repeating to itself, “No
matter what anyone says or does, my task is to be emerald, my color undiminished.”
16. The mind doesn’t get in its own way. It doesn’t frighten
itself into desires. If other things can scare or hurt it, let them;
it won’t go down that road on the basis of its own
perceptions.
Let the body avoid discomfort (if it can), and if it feels it,
say so. But the soul is what feels fear and pain, and what
conceives of them in the first place, and it suffers nothing.
Because it will never conclude that it has.
The mind in itself has no needs, except for those it creates
itself. Is undisturbed, except for its own disturbances. Knows
no obstructions, except those from within.
17. Well-being is good luck, or good character.
17a. (But what are you doing here, Perceptions? Get back to
where you came from, and good riddance. I don’t need you.
Yes, I know, it was only force of habit that brought you. No,
I’m not angry with you. Just go away.)
18. Frightened of change? But what can exist without it?
What’s closer to nature’s heart? Can you take a hot bath and
leave the firewood as it was? Eat food without transforming
it? Can any vital process take place without something being
changed?
Can’t you see? It’s just the same with you—and just as
vital to nature.
19. Carried through existence as through rushing rapids. All
bodies. Which are sprung from nature and cooperate with it,
as our limbs do with each other. Time has swallowed a
Chrysippus, a Socrates and an Epictetus, many times over.
For “Epictetus” read any person, and any thing.
20. My only fear is doing something contrary to human nature —the wrong thing, the wrong way, or at the wrong time.
21. Close to forgetting it all, close to being forgotten.
22. To feel affection for people even when they make
mistakes is uniquely human. You can do it, if you simply
recognize: that they’re human too, that they act out of
ignorance, against their will, and that you’ll both be dead
before long. And, above all, that they haven’t really hurt you.
They haven’t diminished your ability to choose.
23. Nature takes substance and makes a horse. Like a
sculptor with wax. And then melts it down and uses the
material for a tree. Then for a person. Then for something
else. Each existing only briefly.
It does the container no harm to be put together, and none
to be taken apart.
24. Anger in the face is unnatural. † . . . † or in the end is put
out for good, so that it can’t be rekindled. Try to conclude its
unnaturalness from that. (If even the consciousness of acting
badly has gone, why go on living?)
25. Before long, nature, which controls it all, will alter
everything you see and use it as material for something else —over and over again. So that the world is continually
renewed.
26. When people injure you, ask yourself what good or harm
they thought would come of it. If you understand that, you’ll
feel sympathy rather than outrage or anger. Your sense of
good and evil may be the same as theirs, or near it, in which
case you have to excuse them. Or your sense of good and evil
may differ from theirs. In which case they’re misguided and
deserve your compassion. Is that so hard?
27. Treat what you don’t have as nonexistent. Look at what
you have, the things you value most, and think of how much
you’d crave them if you didn’t have them. But be careful.
Don’t feel such satisfaction that you start to overvalue them —that it would upset you to lose them.
28. Self-contraction: the mind’s requirements are satisfied by
doing what we should, and by the calm it brings us.
29. Discard your misperceptions.
Stop being jerked like a puppet.
Limit yourself to the present.
Understand what happens—to you, to others.
Analyze what exists, break it all down: material and
cause.
Anticipate your final hours.
Other people’s mistakes? Leave them to their makers.
30. To direct your thoughts to what is said. To focus the mind
on what happens and what makes it happen.
31. Wash yourself clean. With simplicity, with humility, with
indifference to everything but right and wrong.
Care for other human beings. Follow God.
31a. “ . . . all are relative,” it’s been said, “and in reality
only atoms.” It’s enough to remember the first half: “all are
relative.” “ Which is little enough. “
32. [On death:] If atoms, dispersed. If oneness, quenched or
changed.
33. [On pain:] Unendurable pain brings its own end with it.
Chronic pain is always endurable: the intelligence maintains
serenity by cutting itself off from the body, the mind remains
undiminished. And the parts that pain affects—let them speak
for themselves, if they can.
34. [On Ambition:] How their minds work, the things they
long for and fear. Events like piles of sand, drift upon drift—
each one soon hidden by the next.
35. “ ‘If his mind is filled with nobility, with a grasp of all
time, all existence, do you think our human life will mean
much to him at all?’
“ ‘How could it?’ he said.
“ ‘Or death be very frightening?’
“ ‘Not in the least.’ ”
36. “Kingship: to earn a bad reputation by good deeds.”
37. Disgraceful: that the mind should control the face, should
be able to shape and mold it as it pleases, but not shape and
mold itself.
38. “And why should we feel anger at the world? As if the
world would notice!”
39. “May you bring joy to us and those on high.”
40. “To harvest life like standing stalks of grain Grown and
cut down in turn.”
41. “If I and my two children cannot move the gods The gods
must have their reasons.”
42. “For what is just and good is on my side.”
43. No chorus of lamentation, no hysterics.
44. “Then the only proper response for me to make is this:
‘You are much mistaken, my friend, if you think that any man
worth his salt cares about the risk of death and doesn’t
concentrate on this alone: whether what he’s doing is right or
wrong, and his behavior a good man’s or a bad one’s.’ ”
45. “It’s like this, gentlemen of the jury: The spot where a
person decides to station himself, or wherever his
commanding officer stations him—well, I think that’s where
he ought to take his stand and face the enemy, and not worry
about being killed, or about anything but doing his duty.”
46. “But, my good friend, consider the possibility that
nobility and virtue are not synonymous with the loss or
preservation of one’s life. Is it not possible that a real man
should forget about living a certain number of years, and
should not cling to life, but leave it up to the gods, accepting,
as women say, that ‘no one can escape his fate,’ and turn his
attention to how he can best live the life before him?”
47. To watch the courses of the stars as if you revolved with
them. To keep constantly in mind how the elements alter into
one another. Thoughts like this wash off the mud of life
below.
48. [Plato has it right.] If you want to talk about people, you
need to look down on the earth from above. Herds, armies,
farms; weddings, divorces, births, deaths; noisy courtrooms,
desert places; all the foreign peoples; holidays, days of
mourning, market days . . . all mixed together, a harmony of
opposites.
49. Look at the past—empire succeeding empire—and from
that, extrapolate the future: the same thing. No escape from
the rhythm of events.
Which is why observing life for forty years is as good as a
thousand. Would you really see anything new?
50. “ . . . Earth’s offspring back to earth
But all that’s born of heaven
To heaven returns again.”
Either that or the cluster of atoms pulls apart and one way or
another the insensible elements disperse.
51. “. . . with food and drink and magic spells
Seeking some novel way to frustrate death.”
51a. “To labor cheerfully and so endure
The wind that blows from heaven.”
52. A better wrestler. But not a better citizen, a better person,
a better resource in tight places, a better forgiver of faults.
53. Wherever something can be done as the logos shared by
gods and men dictates, there all is in order. Where there is
profit because our effort is productive, because it advances
in step with our nature, there we have nothing to fear.
54. Everywhere, at each moment, you have the option:
• to accept this event with humility
• to treat this person as he should be treated
• to approach this thought with care, so that nothing
irrational creeps in.
55. Don’t pay attention to other people’s minds. Look straight
ahead, where nature is leading you—nature in general,
through the things that happen to you; and your own nature,
through your own actions.
Everything has to do what it was made for. And other
things were made for those with logos. In this respect as in
others: lower things exist for the sake of higher ones, and
higher things for one another.
Now, the main thing we were made for is to work with
others.
Secondly, to resist our body’s urges. Because things
driven by logos—by thought—have the capacity for
detachment—to resist impulses and sensations, both of which
are merely corporeal. Thought seeks to be their master, not
their subject. And so it should: they were created for its use.
And the third thing is to avoid rashness and credulity.
The mind that grasps this and steers straight ahead should
be able to hold its own.
56. Think of yourself as dead. You have lived your life. Now
take what’s left and live it properly.
57. To love only what happens, what was destined. No
greater harmony.
58. In all that happens, keep before your eyes those who
experienced it before you, and felt shock and outrage and
resentment at it.
And now where are they? Nowhere.
Is that what you want to be like? Instead of avoiding all
these distracting assaults—leaving the alarms and flight to
others—and concentrating on what you can do with it all?
Because you can use it, treat it as raw material. Just pay
attention, and resolve to live up to your own expectations. In
everything. And when faced with a choice, remember: our
business is with things that really matter.
59. Dig deep; the water—goodness—is down there. And as
long as you keep digging, it will keep bubbling up.
60. What the body needs is stability. To be impervious to
jolts in all it is and does. The cohesiveness and beauty that
intelligence lends to the face—that’s what the body needs.
But it should come without effort.
61. Not a dancer but a wrestler: waiting, poised and dug in,
for sudden assaults.
62. Look at who they really are, the people whose approval
you long for, and what their minds are really like. Then you
won’t blame the ones who make mistakes they can’t help, and
you won’t feel a need for their approval. You will have seen
the sources of both—their judgments and their actions.
63. “Against our will, our souls are cut off from truth.”
Truth, yes, and justice, self-control, kindness . . .
Important to keep this in mind. It will make you more
patient with other people.
64. For times when you feel pain:
See that it doesn’t disgrace you, or degrade your
intelligence—doesn’t keep it from acting rationally or
unselfishly.
And in most cases what Epicurus said should help: that
pain is neither unbearable nor unending, as long as you keep
in mind its limits and don’t magnify them in your imagination.
And keep in mind too that pain often comes in disguise—
as drowsiness, fever, loss of appetite. . . . When you’re
bothered by things like that, remind yourself: “I’m giving in
to pain.”
65. Take care that you don’t treat inhumanity as it treats
human beings.
66. How do we know that Telauges wasn’t a better man than
Socrates?
It’s not enough to ask whether Socrates’ death was nobler,
whether he debated with the sophists more adeptly, whether
he showed greater endurance by spending the night out in the
cold, and when he was ordered to arrest the man from
Salamis decided it was preferable to refuse, and “swaggered
about the streets” (which one could reasonably doubt).
What matters is what kind of soul he had.
Whether he was satisfied to treat men with justice and the
gods with reverence and didn’t lose his temper unpredictably
at evil done by others, didn’t make himself the slave of other
people’s ignorance, didn’t treat anything that nature did as
abnormal, or put up with it as an unbearable imposition,
didn’t put his mind in his body’s keeping.
67. Nature did not blend things so inextricably that you can’t
draw your own boundaries—place your own well-being in
your own hands. It’s quite possible to be a good man without
anyone realizing it. Remember that.
And this too: you don’t need much to live happily. And
just because you’ve abandoned your hopes of becoming a
great thinker or scientist, don’t give up on attaining freedom,
achieving humility, serving others, obeying God.
68. To live life in peace, immune to all compulsion. Let them
scream whatever they want. Let animals dismember this soft
flesh that covers you. How would any of that stop you from
keeping your mind calm—reliably sizing up what’s around
you—and ready to make good use of whatever happens? So
that Judgment can look the event in the eye and say, “This is
what you really are, regardless of what you may look like.” While Adaptability adds, “You’re just what I was looking
for.” Because to me the present is a chance for the exercise
of rational virtue—civic virtue—in short, the art that men
share with gods. Both treat whatever happens as wholly
natural; not novel or hard to deal with, but familiar and
easily handled.
69. Perfection of character: to live your last day, every day,
without frenzy, or sloth, or pretense.
70. The gods live forever and yet they don’t seem annoyed at
having to put up with human beings and their behavior
throughout eternity. And not only put up with but actively
care for them.
And you—on the verge of death—you still refuse to care
for them, although you’re one of them yourself.
71. It’s silly to try to escape other people’s faults. They are
inescapable. Just try to escape your own.
72. Whenever the force that makes us rational and social
encounters something that is neither, then it can reasonably
regard it as inferior.
73. You’ve given aid and they’ve received it. And yet, like
an idiot, you keep holding out for more: to be credited with a
Good Deed, to be repaid in kind. Why?
74. No one objects to what is useful to him.
To be of use to others is natural.
Then don’t object to what is useful to you—being of use.
75. Nature willed the creation of the world. Either all that
exists follows logically or even those things to which the
world’s intelligence most directs its will are completely
random.
A source of serenity in more situations than one.
Book 8
1. Another encouragement to humility: you can’t claim to
have lived your life as a philosopher—not even your whole
adulthood. You can see for yourself how far you are from
philosophy. And so can many others. You’re tainted. It’s not
so easy now—to have a reputation as a philosopher. And
your position is an obstacle as well.
So you know how things stand. Now forget what they think
of you. Be satisfied if you can live the rest of your life,
however short, as your nature demands. Focus on that, and
don’t let anything distract you. You’ve wandered all over
and finally realized that you never found what you were
after: how to live. Not in syllogisms, not in money, or fame,
or self-indulgence. Nowhere.
—Then where is it to be found?
In doing what human nature requires.
—How?
Through first principles. Which should govern your
intentions and your actions.
—What principles?
Those to do with good and evil. That nothing is good
except what leads to fairness, and self-control, and courage,
and free will. And nothing bad except what does the
opposite.
2. For every action, ask: How does it affect me? Could I
change my mind about it?
But soon I’ll be dead, and the slate’s empty. So this is the
only question: Is it the action of a responsible being, part of
society, and subject to the same decrees as God?
3. Alexander and Caesar and Pompey. Compared with
Diogenes, Heraclitus, Socrates? The philosophers knew the
what, the why, the how. Their minds were their own.
The others? Nothing but anxiety and enslavement.
4. You can hold your breath until you turn blue, but they’ll
still go on doing it.
5. The first step: Don’t be anxious. Nature controls it all.
And before long you’ll be no one, nowhere—like Hadrian,
like Augustus.
The second step: Concentrate on what you have to do. Fix
your eyes on it. Remind yourself that your task is to be a
good human being; remind yourself what nature demands of
people. Then do it, without hesitation, and speak the truth as
you see it. But with kindness. With humility. Without
hypocrisy.
6. Nature’s job: to shift things elsewhere, to transform them,
to pick them up and move them here and there. Constant
alteration. But not to worry: there’s nothing new here.
Everything is familiar. Even the proportions are unchanged.
7. Nature of any kind thrives on forward progress. And
progress for a rational mind means not accepting falsehood
or uncertainty in its perceptions, making unselfish actions its
only aim, seeking and shunning only the things it has control
over, embracing what nature demands of it—the nature in
which it participates, as the leaf’s nature does in the tree’s.
Except that the nature shared by the leaf is without
consciousness or reason, and subject to impediments. Whereas that shared by human beings is without
impediments, and rational, and just, since it allots to each
and every thing an equal and proportionate share of time,
being, purpose, action, chance. Examine it closely. Not
whether they’re identical point by point, but in the aggregate:
this weighed against that.
8. No time for reading. For controlling your arrogance, yes.
For overcoming pain and pleasure, yes. For outgrowing
ambition, yes. For not feeling anger at stupid and unpleasant
people—even for caring about them—for that, yes.
9. Don’t be overheard complaining about life at court. Not
even to yourself.
10. Remorse is annoyance at yourself for having passed up
something that’s to your benefit. But if it’s to your benefit it
must be good—something a truly good person would be
concerned about.
But no truly good person would feel remorse at passing up
pleasure.
So it cannot be to your benefit, or good.
11. What is this, fundamentally? What is its nature and
substance, its reason for being? What is it doing in the
world? How long is it here for?
12. When you have trouble getting out of bed in the morning,
remember that your defining characteristic—what defines a
human being—is to work with others. Even animals know
how to sleep. And it’s the characteristic activity that’s the
more natural one—more innate and more satisfying.
13. Apply them constantly, to everything that happens:
Physics. Ethics. Logic.
14. When you have to deal with someone, ask yourself: What
does he mean by good and bad? If he thinks x or y about
pleasure and pain (and what produces them), about fame and
disgrace, about death and life, then it shouldn’t shock or
surprise you when he does x or y.
In fact, I’ll remind myself that he has no real choice.
15. Remember: you shouldn’t be surprised that a fig tree
produces figs, nor the world what it produces. A good doctor
isn’t surprised when his patients have fevers, or a helmsman
when the wind blows against him.
16. Remember that to change your mind and to accept
correction are free acts too. The action is yours, based on
your own will, your own decision—and your own mind.
17. If it’s in your control, why do you do it? If it’s in
someone else’s, then who are you blaming? Atoms? The
gods? Stupid either way.
Blame no one. Set people straight, if you can. If not, just
repair the damage. And suppose you can’t do that either.
Then where does blaming people get you?
No pointless actions.
18. What dies doesn’t vanish. It stays here in the world,
transformed, dissolved, as parts of the world, and of you. Which are transformed in turn—without grumbling.
19. Everything is here for a purpose, from horses to vine
shoots. What’s surprising about that? Even the sun will tell
you, “I have a purpose,” and the other gods as well. And why
were you born? For pleasure? See if that answer will stand
up to questioning.
20. Nature is like someone throwing a ball in the air, gauging
its rise and arc—and where it will fall. And what does the
ball gain as it flies upward? Or lose when it plummets to
earth?
What does the bubble gain from its existence? Or lose by
bursting?
And the same for a candle.
21. Turn it inside out: What is it like? What is it like old? Or
sick? Or selling itself on the streets?
They all die soon—praiser and praised, rememberer and
remembered. Remembered in these parts or in a corner of
them. Even there they don’t all agree with each other (or
even with themselves).
And the whole earth a mere point in space.
22. Stick to what’s in front of you—idea, action, utterance.
22a. This is what you deserve. You could be good today. But
instead you choose tomorrow.
23. What I do? I attribute it to human beneficence.
What is done to me? I accept it—and attribute it to the
gods, and that source from which all things together flow.
24. Like the baths—oil, sweat, dirt, grayish water, all of it
disgusting.
The whole of life, all of the visible world.
25. Verus, leaving Lucilla behind, then Lucilla. Maximus,
leaving Secunda. And Secunda. Diotimus, leaving
Epitynchanus. Then Epitynchanus. Faustina, leaving
Antoninus. Then Antoninus.
So with all of them.
Hadrian, leaving Celer. And Celer.
Where have they gone, the brilliant, the insightful ones, the
proud? Brilliant as Charax and Demetrius the Platonist and
Eudaemon and the rest of them. Short-lived creatures, long
dead. Some of them not remembered at all, some become
legends, some lost even to legend.
So remember: your components will be scattered too, the
life within you quenched. Or marching orders and another
posting.
26. Joy for humans lies in human actions.
Human actions: kindness to others, contempt for the
senses, the interrogation of appearances, observation of
nature and of events in nature.
27. Three relationships:
i. with the body you inhabit;
ii. with the divine, the cause of everything in all things;
iii. with the people around you.
28. Either pain affects the body (which is the body’s
problem) or it affects the soul. But the soul can choose not to
be affected, preserving its own serenity, its own tranquillity.
All our decisions, urges, desires, aversions lie within. No
evil can touch them.
29. To erase false perceptions, tell yourself: I have it in me
to keep my soul from evil, lust and all confusion. To see
things as they are and treat them as they deserve. Don’t
overlook this innate ability.
30. To speak to the Senate—or anyone—in the right tone,
without being overbearing. To choose the right words.
31. Augustus’s court: his wife, his daughter, his grandsons,
his stepsons, his sister, Agrippa, the relatives, servants,
friends, Areius, Maecenas, the doctors, the sacrificial priests
. . . the whole court, dead.
And consider the others . . . not just the deaths of
individuals (like the family of the Pompeys).
That line they write on tombs—“last surviving
descendant.” Consider their ancestors’ anxiety—that there be
a successor. But someone has to be the last. There, too, the
death of a whole house.
32. You have to assemble your life yourself—action by
action. And be satisfied if each one achieves its goal, as far
as it can. No one can keep that from happening.
—But there are external obstacles. . . .
Not to behaving with justice, self-control, and good sense.
—Well, but perhaps to some more concrete action.
But if you accept the obstacle and work with what you’re
given, an alternative will present itself—another piece of
what you’re trying to assemble. Action by action.
33. To accept it without arrogance, to let it go with
indifference.
34. Have you ever seen a severed hand or foot, or a
decapitated head, just lying somewhere far away from the
body it belonged to . . . ? That’s what we do to ourselves—
or try to—when we rebel against what happens to us, when
we segregate ourselves. Or when we do something selfish.
You have torn yourself away from unity—your natural
state, one you were born to share in. Now you’ve cut
yourself off from it.
But you have one advantage here: you can reattach
yourself. A privilege God has granted to no other part of no
other whole—to be separated, cut away, and reunited. But
look how he’s singled us out. He’s allowed us not to be
broken off in the first place, and when we are he’s allowed
us to return, to graft ourselves back on, and take up our old
position once again: part of a whole.
35. We have various abilities, present in all rational
creatures as in the nature of rationality itself. And this is one
of them. Just as nature takes every obstacle, every
impediment, and works around it—turns it to its purposes,
incorporates it into itself—so, too, a rational being can turn
each setback into raw material and use it to achieve its goal.
36. Don’t let your imagination be crushed by life as a whole.
Don’t try to picture everything bad that could possibly
happen. Stick with the situation at hand, and ask, “Why is this
so unbearable? Why can’t I endure it?” You’ll be
embarrassed to answer.
Then remind yourself that past and future have no power
over you. Only the present—and even that can be minimized.
Just mark off its limits. And if your mind tries to claim that it
can’t hold out against that . . . well, then, heap shame upon it.
37. Are Pantheia or Pergamos still keeping watch at the tomb
of Verus? Chabrias or Diotimus at the tomb of Hadrian? Of
course they aren’t. Would the emperors know it if they were?
And even if they knew, would it please them?
And even if it did, would the mourners live forever? Were
they, too, not fated to grow old and then die? And when that
happened, what would the emperors do?
38. The stench of decay. Rotting meat in a bag.
Look at it clearly. If you can.
39. “To the best of my judgment, when I look at the human
character I see no virtue placed there to counter justice. But I
see one to counter pleasure: self-control.”
40. Stop perceiving the pain you imagine and you’ll remain
completely unaffected.
—“You?”
Your logos.
—But I’m not just logos.
Fine. Just don’t let the logos be injured. If anything else is,
let it decide that for itself.
41. For animate beings, “harmful” is whatever obstructs the
operation of their senses—or the fulfillment of what they
intend. Similar obstructions constitute harm to plants. So too
for rational creatures, anything that obstructs the operation of
the mind is harmful.
Apply this to yourself.
Do pain and pleasure have their hooks in you? Let the
senses deal with it. Are there obstacles to your action? If you
failed to reckon with the possibility, then that would harm
you, as a rational being. But if you use common sense, you
haven’t been harmed or even obstructed. No one can obstruct
the operations of the mind. Nothing can get at them—not fire
or steel, not tyrants, not abuse—nothing. As long as it’s “a
sphere . . . in perfect stillness.”
42. I have no right to do myself an injury. Have I ever injured
anyone else if I could avoid it?
43. People find pleasure in different ways. I find it in
keeping my mind clear. In not turning away from people or
the things that happen to them. In accepting and welcoming
everything I see. In treating each thing as it deserves.
44. Give yourself a gift: the present moment.
People out for posthumous fame forget that the Generations
To Come will be the same annoying people they know now.
And just as mortal. What does it matter to you if they say x
about you, or think y?
45. Lift me up and hurl me. Wherever you will. My spirit
will be gracious to me there—gracious and satisfied—as
long as its existence and actions match its nature.
Is there any reason why my soul should suffer and be
degraded—miserable, tense, huddled, frightened? How
could there be?
46. What humans experience is part of human experience.
The experience of the ox is part of the experience of oxen, as
the vine’s is of the vine, and the stone’s what is proper to
stones.
Nothing that can happen is unusual or unnatural, and
there’s no sense in complaining. Nature does not make us
endure the unendurable.
47. External things are not the problem. It’s your assessment
of them. Which you can erase right now.
If the problem is something in your own character, who’s
stopping you from setting your mind straight?
And if it’s that you’re not doing something you think you
should be, why not just do it?
—But there are insuperable obstacles.
Then it’s not a problem. The cause of your inaction lies
outside you.
—But how can I go on living with that undone?
Then depart, with a good conscience, as if you’d done it,
embracing the obstacles too.
48. Remember that when it withdraws into itself and finds
contentment there, the mind is invulnerable. It does nothing
against its will, even if its resistance is irrational. And if its
judgment is deliberate and grounded in logic . . . ?
The mind without passions is a fortress. No place is more
secure. Once we take refuge there we are safe forever. Not to
see this is ignorance. To see it and not seek safety means
misery.
49. Nothing but what you get from first impressions. That
someone has insulted you, for instance. That—but not that it’s
done you any harm. The fact that my son is sick—that I can
see. But “that he might die of it,” no. Stick with first
impressions. Don’t extrapolate. And nothing can happen to
you.
Or extrapolate. From a knowledge of all that can happen in
the world.
50. The cucumber is bitter? Then throw it out.
There are brambles in the path? Then go around them.
That’s all you need to know. Nothing more. Don’t demand
to know “why such things exist.” Anyone who understands
the world will laugh at you, just as a carpenter would if you
seemed shocked at finding sawdust in his workshop, or a
shoemaker at scraps of leather left over from work.
Of course, they have a place to dispose of these; nature has
no door to sweep things out of. But the wonderful thing about
its workmanship is how, faced with that limitation, it takes
everything within it that seems broken, old and useless,
transforms it into itself, and makes new things from it. So that
it doesn’t need material from any outside source, or
anywhere to dispose of what’s left over. It relies on itself for
all it needs: space, material, and labor.
51. No carelessness in your actions. No confusion in your
words. No imprecision in your thoughts. No retreating into
your own soul, or trying to escape it. No overactivity.
They kill you, cut you with knives, shower you with
curses. And that somehow cuts your mind off from clearness,
and sanity, and self-control, and justice?
A man standing by a spring of clear, sweet water and
cursing it. While the fresh water keeps on bubbling up. He
can shovel mud into it, or dung, and the stream will carry it
away, wash itself clean, remain unstained.
To have that. Not a cistern but a perpetual spring.
How? By working to win your freedom. Hour by hour.
Through patience, honesty, humility.
52. Not to know what the world is is to be ignorant of where
you are.
Not to know why it’s here is to be ignorant of who you
are. And what it is.
Not to know any of this is to be ignorant of why you’re
here.
And what are we to make of anyone who cares about the
applause of such people, who don’t know where or who they
are?
53. You want praise from people who kick themselves every
fifteen minutes, the approval of people who despise
themselves. (Is it a sign of self-respect to regret nearly
everything you do?)
54. To join ourselves not just to the air surrounding us,
through breath, but to the reason that embraces all things,
through thought. Reason is just as omnipresent, just as widely
diffused in those who accept it as air is in those who breathe.
55. The existence of evil does not harm the world. And an
individual act of evil does not harm the victim. Only one
person is harmed by it—and he can stop being harmed as
soon as he decides to.
56. Other people’s wills are as independent of mine as their
breath and bodies. We may exist for the sake of one another,
but our will rules its own domain. Otherwise the harm they
do would cause harm to me. Which is not what God intended —for my happiness to rest with someone else.
57. We speak of the sun’s light as “pouring down on us,” as
“pouring over us” in all directions. Yet it’s never poured out.
Because it doesn’t really pour; it extends. Its beams (aktai)
get their name from their extension (ekteinesthai).
To see the nature of a sunbeam, look at light as it falls
through a narrow opening into a dark room. It extends in a
straight line, striking any solid object that stands in its way
and blocks the space beyond it. There it remains—not
vanishing, or falling away.
That’s what the outpouring—the diffusion—of thought
should be like: not emptied out, but extended. And not
striking at obstacles with fury and violence, or falling away
before them, but holding its ground and illuminating what
receives it.
What doesn’t transmit light creates its own darkness.
58. Fear of death is fear of what we may experience. Nothing
at all, or something quite new. But if we experience nothing,
we can experience nothing bad. And if our experience
changes, then our existence will change with it—change, but
not cease.
59. People exist for one another. You can instruct or endure
them.
60. An arrow has one motion and the mind another. Even
when pausing, even when weighing conclusions, the mind is
moving forward, toward its goal.
61. To enter others’ minds and let them enter yours.
Book 9
1. Injustice is a kind of blasphemy. Nature designed rational
beings for each other’s sake: to help—not harm—one
another, as they deserve. To transgress its will, then, is to
blaspheme against the oldest of the gods.
And to lie is to blaspheme against it too. Because “nature” means the nature of that which is. And that which is and that
which is the case are closely linked, so that nature is
synonymous with Truth—the source of all true things. To lie
deliberately is to blaspheme—the liar commits deceit, and
thus injustice. And likewise to lie without realizing it.
Because the involuntary liar disrupts the harmony of nature—
its order. He is in conflict with the way the world is
structured. As anyone is who deviates toward what is
opposed to the truth—even against his will. Nature gave him
the resources to distinguish between true and false. And he
neglected them, and now can’t tell the difference.
And to pursue pleasure as good, and flee from pain as evil —that too is blasphemous. Someone who does that is bound
to find himself constantly reproaching nature—complaining
that it doesn’t treat the good and bad as they deserve, but
often lets the bad enjoy pleasure and the things that produce
it, and makes the good suffer pain, and the things that produce
pain. And moreover, to fear pain is to fear something that’s
bound to happen, the world being what it is—and that again
is blasphemy. While if you pursue pleasure, you can hardly
avoid wrongdoing—which is manifestly blasphemous.
Some things nature is indifferent to; if it privileged one
over the other it would hardly have created both. And if we
want to follow nature, to be of one mind with it, we need to
share its indifference. To privilege pleasure over pain—life
over death, fame over anonymity—is clearly blasphemous.
Nature certainly doesn’t.
And when I say that nature is indifferent to them, I mean
that they happen indifferently, at different times, to the things
that exist and the things that come into being after them,
through some ancient decree of Providence—the decree by
which from some initial starting point it embarked on the
creation that we know, by laying down the principles of what
was to come and determining the generative forces: existence
and change, and their successive stages.
2. Real good luck would be to abandon life without ever
encountering dishonesty, or hypocrisy, or self-indulgence, or
pride. But the “next best voyage” is to die when you’ve had
enough. Or are you determined to lie down with evil? Hasn’t
experience even taught you that—to avoid it like the plague?
Because it is a plague—a mental cancer—worse than
anything caused by tainted air or an unhealthy climate.
Diseases like that can only threaten your life; this one attacks
your humanity.
3. Don’t look down on death, but welcome it. It too is one of
the things required by nature. Like youth and old age. Like
growth and maturity. Like a new set of teeth, a beard, the first
gray hair. Like sex and pregnancy and childbirth. Like all the
other physical changes at each stage of life, our dissolution is
no different.
So this is how a thoughtful person should await death: not
with indifference, not with impatience, not with disdain, but
simply viewing it as one of the things that happen to us. Now
you anticipate the child’s emergence from its mother’s
womb; that’s how you should await the hour when your soul
will emerge from its compartment.
Or perhaps you need some tidy aphorism to tuck away in
the back of your mind. Well, consider two things that should
reconcile you to death: the nature of the things you’ll leave
behind you, and the kind of people you’ll no longer be mixed
up with. There’s no need to feel resentment toward them—in
fact, you should look out for their well-being, and be gentle
with them—but keep in mind that everything you believe is
meaningless to those you leave behind. Because that’s all that
could restrain us (if anything could)—the only thing that
could make us want to stay here: the chance to live with
those who share our vision. But now? Look how tiring it is—
this cacophony we live in. Enough to make you say to death,
“Come quickly. Before I start to forget myself, like them.”
4. To do harm is to do yourself harm. To do an injustice is to
do yourself an injustice—it degrades you.
5. And you can also commit injustice by doing nothing.
6. Objective judgment, now, at this very moment.
Unselfish action, now, at this very moment.
Willing acceptance—now, at this very moment—of all
external events.
That’s all you need.
7. Blot out your imagination. Turn your desire to stone.
Quench your appetites. Keep your mind centered on itself.
8. Animals without the logos are assigned the same soul, and
those who have the logos share one too—a rational one. Just
as all earthly creatures share one earth. Just as we all see by
the same light, and breathe the same air—all of us who see
and breathe.
9. All things are drawn toward what is like them, if such a
thing exists. All earthly things feel the earth’s tug. All wet
things flow together. And airy things as well, so they have to
be forcibly prevented from mixing. Fire is naturally drawn
upward by that higher fire, but ready to ignite at the slightest
touch of other, earthly flame. So that anything drier than usual
makes good fuel, because less of what hinders combustion is
mixed in with it.
And things that share an intelligent nature are just as prone
to seek out what is like them. If not more so. Because their
superiority in other ways is matched by their greater
readiness to mix and mingle with their counterparts.
Even in irrational beings we see swarms and herds, and
nesting, and love not unlike ours. Because they do have
souls, and the bonding instinct is found in a developed form —not something we see in plants, or stones, or trees. And
it’s still more developed in rational beings, with their states,
friendships, families, groups, their treaties and truces. And in
those yet more developed there is a kind of unity even
between separate things, the kind that we see in the stars. An
advanced level of development can produce a sympathy even
in things that are quite distinct.
But look how things are now. The rational things are the
only ones that have lost that sense of attraction—of
convergence. Only there do we not see that intermingling. But
however much they try to avoid it, there’s no escaping.
Nature is stronger. As you can see if you look closely.
Concrete objects can pull free of the earth more easily than
humans can escape humanity.
10. Humanity, divinity, and the world: all of them bearing
fruit. Each fruitful in its season. Normally we limit the word
to vines and other plants. Unnecessarily. The fruit of the
logos nourishes both us and it. And other things spring from
it too—of the same species as the logos itself.
11. Convince them not to.
If you can.
And if not, remember: the capacity for patience was given
us for a reason. The gods are patient with them too, and even
help them to concrete things: health, money, fame. . . . Such is
the gods’ goodness.
And yours, too, if you wanted. What’s stopping you?
12. Work:
Not to rouse pity, not to win sympathy or admiration. Only
this:
Activity.
Stillness.
As the logos of the state requires.
13. Today I escaped from anxiety. Or no, I discarded it,
because it was within me, in my own perceptions—not
outside.
14. Known by long experience, limited in life span, debased
in substance—all of it.
Now as then, in the time of those we buried.
15. Things wait outside us, hover at the door. They keep to
themselves. Ask them who they are and they don’t know, they
can give no account of themselves.
What accounts for them?
The mind does.
16. Not being done to, but doing—the source of good and
bad for rational and political beings. Where their own
goodness and badness is found—not in being done to, but in
doing.
17. A rock thrown in the air. It loses nothing by coming
down, gained nothing by going up.
18. Enter their minds, and you’ll find the judges you’re so
afraid of—and how judiciously they judge themselves.
19. Everything in flux. And you too will alter in the whirl and
perish, and the world as well.
20. Leave other people’s mistakes where they lie.
21. When we cease from activity, or follow a thought to its
conclusion, it’s a kind of death. And it doesn’t harm us.
Think about your life: childhood, boyhood, youth, old age.
Every transformation a kind of dying. Was that so terrible?
Think about life with your grandfather, your mother, your
adopted father. Realize how many other deaths and
transformations and endings there have been and ask
yourself: Was that so terrible?
Then neither will the close of your life be—its ending and
transformation.
22. Go straight to the seat of intelligence—your own, the
world’s, your neighbor’s.
Your own—to ground it in justice.
The world’s—to remind yourself what it is that you’re
part of.
Your neighbor’s—to distinguish ignorance from
calculation. And recognize it as like yours.
23. You participate in a society by your existence. Then
participate in its life through your actions—all your actions.
Any action not directed toward a social end (directly or
indirectly) is a disturbance to your life, an obstacle to
wholeness, a source of dissension. Like the man in the
Assembly—a faction to himself, always out of step with the
majority.
24. Childish tantrums, children’s games, “spirits carrying
corpses”; “Odysseus in the Underworld” saw more real life.
25. Identify its purpose—what makes it what it is—and
examine that. (Ignore its concrete form.) Then calculate the
length of time that such a thing was meant to last.
26. Endless suffering—all from not allowing the mind to do
its job. Enough.
27. When you face someone’s insults, hatred, whatever . . .
look at his soul. Get inside him. Look at what sort of person
he is. You’ll find you don’t need to strain to impress him.
But you do have to wish him well. He’s your closest
relative. The gods assist him just as they do you—by signs
and dreams and every other way—to get the things he wants.
28. The world’s cycles never change—up and down, from
age to age.
Either the world’s intelligence wills each thing (if so,
accept its will), or it exercised that will once—once and for
all—and all else follows as a consequence (and if so, why
worry?).
One way or another: atoms or unity. If it’s God, all is
well. If it’s arbitrary, don’t imitate it.
The earth will cover us all, and then be transformed in
turn, and that too will change, ad infinitum. And that as well,
ad infinitum.
Think about them: the waves of change and alteration,
endlessly breaking. And see our brief mortality for what it is.
29. The design of the world is like a flood, sweeping all
before it. The foolishness of them—little men busy with
affairs of state, with philosophy—or what they think of as
philosophy. Nothing but phlegm and mucus.
—Well, then what?
Do what nature demands. Get a move on—if you have it in
you—and don’t worry whether anyone will give you credit
for it. And don’t go expecting Plato’s Republic; be satisfied
with even the smallest progress, and treat the outcome of it
all as unimportant.
Who can change their minds? And without that change,
what is there but groaning, slavery, a pretense of obedience?
Go on and cite Alexander, Philip, Demetrius of Phalerum. Whether they knew nature’s will and made themselves its
student is for them to say. And if they preferred to play the
king? Well, no one forced me to be their understudy.
The task of philosophy is modest and straightforward.
Don’t tempt me to presumption.
30. To see them from above: the thousands of animal herds,
the rituals, the voyages on calm or stormy seas, the different
ways we come into the world, share it with one another, and
leave it. Consider the lives led once by others, long ago, the
lives to be led by others after you, the lives led even now, in
foreign lands. How many people don’t even know your name.
How many will soon have forgotten it. How many offer you
praise now—and tomorrow, perhaps, contempt.
That to be remembered is worthless. Like fame. Like
everything.
31. Indifference to external events.
And a commitment to justice in your own acts.
Which means: thought and action resulting in the common
good.
What you were born to do.
32. You can discard most of the junk that clutters your mind —things that exist only there—and clear out space for
yourself:
. . . by comprehending the scale of the world
. . . by contemplating infinite time
. . . by thinking of the speed with which things change—
each part of every thing; the narrow space between
our birth and death; the infinite time before; the
equally unbounded time that follows.
33. All that you see will soon have vanished, and those who
see it vanish will vanish themselves, and the ones who
reached old age have no advantage over the untimely dead.
34. What their minds are like. What they work at. What
evokes their love and admiration.
Imagine their souls stripped bare. And their vanity. To
suppose that their disdain could harm anyone—or their
praise help them.
35. To decompose is to be recomposed.
That’s what nature does. Nature—through whom all things
happen as they should, and have happened forever in just the
same way, and will continue to, one way or another,
endlessly.
That things happen for the worst and always will, that the
gods have no power to regulate them, and the world is
condemned to never-ending evil—how can you say that?
36. Disgust at what things are made of: Liquid, dust, bones,
filth. Or marble as hardened dirt, gold and silver as residues,
clothes as hair, purple dye as shellfish blood. And all the
rest.
And the same with our living breath—transformed from
one thing to another.
37. Enough of this wretched, whining monkey life.
What’s the matter? Is any of this new? What is it you find
surprising?
The purpose? Look at it.
The material? Look at that.
That’s all there is.
And the gods? Well, you could try being simpler, gentler.
Even now.
A hundred years or three. . . . No difference.
38. If they’ve injured you, then they’re the ones who suffer
for it.
But have they?
39. Either all things spring from one intelligent source and
form a single body (and the part should accept the actions of
the whole) or there are only atoms, joining and splitting
forever, and nothing else.
So why feel anxiety?
Say to your mind: Are you dead? damaged? brutal?
dishonest?
Are you one of the herd? or grazing like one?
40. Either the gods have power or they don’t. If they don’t,
why pray? If they do, then why not pray for something else
instead of for things to happen or not to happen? Pray not to
feel fear. Or desire, or grief. If the gods can do anything, they
can surely do that for us.
—But those are things the gods left up to me.
Then isn’t it better to do what’s up to you—like a free man —than to be passively controlled by what isn’t, like a slave
or beggar? And what makes you think the gods don’t care
about what’s up to us?
Start praying like this and you’ll see.
Not “some way to sleep with her”—but a way to stop
wanting to.
Not “some way to get rid of him”—but a way to stop
trying.
Not “some way to save my child”—but a way to lose your
fear.
Redirect your prayers like that, and watch what happens.
41. Epicurus: “During my illness, my conversations were not
about my physical state; I did not waste my visitors’ time
with things of that sort, but went on discussing philosophy,
and concentrated on one point in particular: how the mind
can participate in the sensations of the body and yet maintain
its serenity, and focus on its own well-being. Nor did I let
my doctors strut about like grandees. I went on living my life
the way it should be lived.”
Like that. In illness—or any other situation.
Not to let go of philosophy, no matter what happens; not to
bandy words with crackpots and philistines—good rules for
any philosopher.
Concentrate on what you’re doing, and what you’re doing
it with.
42. When you run up against someone else’s shamelessness,
ask yourself this: Is a world without shamelessness possible?
No.
Then don’t ask the impossible. There have to be shameless
people in the world. This is one of them.
The same for someone vicious or untrustworthy, or with
any other defect. Remembering that the whole class has to
exist will make you more tolerant of its members.
Another useful point to bear in mind: What qualities has
nature given us to counter that defect? As an antidote to
unkindness it gave us kindness. And other qualities to
balance other flaws.
And when others stray off course, you can always try to set
them straight, because every wrongdoer is doing something
wrong—doing something the wrong way.
And how does it injure you anyway? You’ll find that none
of the people you’re upset about has done anything that could
do damage to your mind. But that’s all that “harm” or
“injury” could mean. Yes, boorish people do boorish things. What’s strange or unheard-of about that? Isn’t it yourself you
should reproach—for not anticipating that they’d act this
way? The logos gave you the means to see it—that a given
person would act a given way—but you paid no attention.
And now you’re astonished that he’s gone and done it. So
when you call someone “untrustworthy” or “ungrateful,” turn
the reproach on yourself. It was you who did wrong. By
assuming that someone with those traits deserved your trust.
Or by doing them a favor and expecting something in return,
instead of looking to the action itself for your reward. What
else did you expect from helping someone out? Isn’t it
enough that you’ve done what your nature demands? You
want a salary for it too? As if your eyes expected a reward
for seeing, or your feet for walking. That’s what they were
made for. By doing what they were designed to do, they’re
performing their function. Whereas humans were made to
help others. And when we do help others—or help them to
do something—we’re doing what we were designed for. We
perform our function.
Book 10
1. To my soul:
Are you ever going to achieve goodness? Ever going to be
simple, whole, and naked—as plain to see as the body that
contains you? Know what an affectionate and loving
disposition would feel like? Ever be fulfilled, ever stop
desiring—lusting and longing for people and things to enjoy?
Or for more time to enjoy them? Or for some other place or
country—“a more temperate clime”? Or for people easier to
get along with? And instead be satisfied with what you have,
and accept the present—all of it. And convince yourself that
everything is the gift of the gods, that things are good and
always will be, whatever they decide and have in store for
the preservation of that perfect entity—good and just and
beautiful, creating all things, connecting and embracing them,
and gathering in their separated fragments to create more like
them.
Will you ever take your stand as a fellow citizen with gods
and human beings, blaming no one, deserving no one’s
censure?
2. Focus on what nature demands, as if you were governed
by that alone. Then do that, and accept it, unless your nature
as a living being would be degraded by it.
Then focus on what that nature demands, and accept that
too—unless your nature as a rational being would be
degraded by it.
And, of course, “rational” also implies “civic.”
Follow these guidelines and don’t waste time on anything
else.
3. Everything that happens is either endurable or not.
If it’s endurable, then endure it. Stop complaining.
If it’s unendurable . . . then stop complaining. Your
destruction will mean its end as well.
Just remember: you can endure anything your mind can
make endurable, by treating it as in your interest to do so.
In your interest, or in your nature.
4. If they’ve made a mistake, correct them gently and show
them where they went wrong. If you can’t do that, then the
blame lies with you. Or no one.
5. Whatever happens to you has been waiting to happen since
the beginning of time. The twining strands of fate wove both
of them together: your own existence and the things that
happen to you.
6. Whether it’s atoms or nature, the first thing to be said is
this: I am a part of a world controlled by nature. Secondly:
that I have a relationship with other, similar parts. And with
that in mind I have no right, as a part, to complain about what
is assigned me by the whole. Because what benefits the
whole can’t harm the parts, and the whole does nothing that
doesn’t benefit it. That’s a trait shared by all natures, but the
nature of the world is defined by a second characteristic as
well: no outside force can compel it to cause itself harm.
So by keeping in mind the whole I form a part of, I’ll
accept whatever happens. And because of my relationship to
other parts, I will do nothing selfish, but aim instead to join
them, to direct my every action toward what benefits us all
and to avoid what doesn’t. If I do all that, then my life should
go smoothly. As you might expect a citizen’s life to go—one
whose actions serve his fellow citizens, and who embraces
the community’s decree.
7. The whole is compounded by nature of individual parts,
whose destruction is inevitable (“destruction” here meaning
transformation). If the process is harmful to the parts and
unavoidable, then it’s hard to see how the whole can run
smoothly, with parts of it passing from one state to another,
all of them built only to be destroyed in different ways. Does
nature set out to cause its own components harm, and make
them vulnerable to it—indeed, predestined to it? Or is it
oblivious to what goes on? Neither one seems very
plausible.
But suppose we throw out “nature” and explain these
things through inherent properties. It would still be absurd to
say that the individual things in the world are inherently
prone to change, and at the same time be astonished at it or
complain—on the grounds that it was happening “contrary to
nature.” And least of all when things return to the state from
which they came. Because our elements are either simply
dispersed, or are subject to a kind of gravitation—the solid
portions being pulled toward earth, and what is ethereal
drawn into the air, until they’re absorbed into the universal
logos—which is subject to periodic conflagrations, or
renewed through continual change.
And don’t imagine either that those elements—the solid
ones and the ethereal—are with us from our birth. Their
influx took place yesterday, or the day before—from the food
we ate, the air we breathed.
And that’s what changes—not the person your mother gave
birth to.
—But if you’re inextricably linked to it through your sense
of individuality?
That’s not what we’re talking about here.
8. Epithets for yourself: Upright. Modest. Straightforward.
Sane. Cooperative. Disinterested.
Try not to exchange them for others.
And if you should forfeit them, set about getting them back.
Keep in mind that “sanity” means understanding things—
each individual thing—for what they are. And not losing the
thread.
And “cooperation” means accepting what nature assigns
you—accepting it willingly.
And “disinterest” means that the intelligence should rise
above the movements of the flesh—the rough and the smooth
alike. Should rise above fame, above death, and everything
like them.
If you maintain your claim to these epithets—without
caring if others apply them to you or not—you’ll become a
new person, living a new life. To keep on being the person
that you’ve been—to keep being mauled and degraded by the
life you’re living—is to be devoid of sense and much too
fond of life. Like those animal fighters at the games—torn
half to pieces, covered in blood and gore, and still pleading
to be held over till tomorrow . . . to be bitten and clawed
again.
Set sail, then, with this handful of epithets to guide you.
And steer a steady course, if you can. Like an emigrant to the
islands of the blest. And if you feel yourself adrift—as if
you’ve lost control—then hope for the best, and put in
somewhere where you can regain it. Or leave life altogether,
not in anger, but matter-of-factly, straightforwardly, without
arrogance, in the knowledge that you’ve at least done that
much with your life.
And as you try to keep these epithets in mind, it will help
you a great deal to keep the gods in mind as well. What they
want is not flattery, but for rational things to be like them.
For figs to do what figs were meant to do—and dogs, and
bees . . . and people.
9. Operatics, combat and confusion. Sloth and servility.
Every day they blot out those sacred principles of yours—
which you daydream thoughtlessly about, or just let slide.
Your actions and perceptions need to aim:
• at accomplishing practical ends
• at the exercise of thought
• at maintaining a confidence founded on understanding.
An unobtrusive confidence—hidden in plain sight.
When will you let yourself enjoy straightforwardness?
Seriousness? Or understanding individual things—their
nature and substance, their place in the world, their life span,
their composition, who can possess them, whose they are to
give and to receive?
10. Spiders are proud of catching flies, men of catching
hares, fish in a net, boars, bears, Sarmatians . . .
Criminal psychology.
11. How they all change into one another—acquire the
ability to see that. Apply it constantly; use it to train yourself.
Nothing is as conducive to spiritual growth.
11a. He has stripped away his body and—realizing that at
some point soon he will have to abandon mankind and leave
all this behind—has dedicated himself to serving justice in
all he does, and nature in all that happens. What people say
or think about him, or how they treat him, isn’t something he
worries about. Only these two questions: Is what he’s doing
now the right thing to be doing? Does he accept and welcome
what he’s been assigned? He has stripped away all other
occupations, all other tasks. He wants only to travel a
straight path—to God, by way of law.
12. Why all this guesswork? You can see what needs to be
done. If you can see the road, follow it. Cheerfully, without
turning back. If not, hold up and get the best advice you can.
If anything gets in the way, forge on ahead, making good use
of what you have on hand, sticking to what seems right. (The
best goal to achieve, and the one we fall short of when we
fail.)
12a. To follow the logos in all things is to be relaxed and
energetic, joyful and serious at once.
13. When you wake up, ask yourself:
Does it make any difference to you if other people blame
you for doing what’s right?
It makes no difference.
Have you forgotten what the people who are so vociferous
in praise or blame of others are like as they sleep and eat?
Forgotten their behavior, their fears, their desires, their thefts
and depredations—not physical ones, but those committed by
what should be highest in them? What creates, when it
chooses, loyalty, humility, truth, order, well-being.
14. Nature gives and nature takes away. Anyone with sense
and humility will tell her, “Give and take as you please,” not
out of defiance, but out of obedience and goodwill.
15. Only a short time left. Live as if you were alone—out in
the wilderness. No difference between here and there: the
city that you live in is the world.
Let people see someone living naturally, and understand
what that means. Let them kill him if they can’t stand it.
(Better than living like this.)
16. To stop talking about what the good man is like, and just
be one.
17. Continual awareness of all time and space, of the size
and life span of the things around us. A grape seed in infinite
space. A half twist of a corkscrew against eternity.
18. Bear in mind that everything that exists is already fraying
at the edges, and in transition, subject to fragmentation and to
rot.
Or that everything was born to die.
19. How they act when they eat and sleep and mate and
defecate and all the rest. Then when they order and exult, or
rage and thunder from on high. And yet, just consider the
things they submitted to a moment ago, and the reasons for it —and the things they’ll submit to again before very long.
20. Each of us needs what nature gives us, when nature gives
it.
21. “The earth knows longing for the rain, the sky/knows
longing . . .” And the world longs to create what will come to
be. I tell it “I share your longing.”
(And isn’t that what we mean by “inclined to happen”?)
22. Possibilities:
i. To keep on living (you should be used to it by now)
ii. To end it (it was your choice, after all)
iii. To die (having met your obligations)
Those are the only options. Reason for optimism.
23. Keep always before you that “this is no different from an
empty field,” and the things in it are the same as on a
mountaintop, on the seashore, wherever. Plato gets to the
heart of it: “fencing a sheepfold in the mountains, and milking
goats or sheep.”
24. My mind. What is it? What am I making of it? What am I
using it for?
Is it empty of thought?
Isolated and torn loose from those around it?
Melted into flesh and blended with it, so that it shares its
urges?
25. When a slave runs away from his master, we call him a
fugitive slave. But the law of nature is a master too, and to
break it is to become a fugitive.
To feel grief, anger or fear is to try to escape from
something decreed by the ruler of all things, now or in the
past or in the future. And that ruler is law, which governs
what happens to each of us. To feel grief or anger or fear is
to become a fugitive—a fugitive from justice.
26. He deposits his sperm and leaves. And then a force not
his takes it and goes to work, and creates a child.
This . . . from that?
Or:
He pours food down his throat. And then a force not his
takes it and creates sensations, desires, daily life, physical
strength and so much else besides.
To look at these things going on silently and see the force
that drives them. As we see the force that pushes things and
pulls them. Not with our eyes, but just as clearly.
27. To bear in mind constantly that all of this has happened
before. And will happen again—the same plot from
beginning to end, the identical staging. Produce them in your
mind, as you know them from experience or from history: the
court of Hadrian, of Antoninus. The courts of Philip,
Alexander, Croesus. All just the same. Only the people
different.
28. People who feel hurt and resentment: picture them as the
pig at the sacrifice, kicking and squealing all the way.
Like the man alone in his bed, silently weeping over the
chains that bind us.
That everything has to submit. But only rational beings can
do so voluntarily.
29. Stop whatever you’re doing for a moment and ask
yourself: Am I afraid of death because I won’t be able to do
this anymore?
30. When faced with people’s bad behavior, turn around and
ask when you have acted like that. When you saw money as a
good, or pleasure, or social position. Your anger will
subside as soon as you recognize that they acted under
compulsion (what else could they do?).
Or remove the compulsion, if you can.
31. When you look at Satyron, see Socraticus, or Eutyches,
or Hymen.
When you look at Euphrates, see Eutychion or Silvanus.
With Alciphron, see Tropaeophorus.
When you look at Xenophon, see Crito or Severus.
When you look at yourself, see any of the emperors.
And the same with everyone else. Then let it hit you:
Where are they now?
Nowhere . . . or wherever.
That way you’ll see human life for what it is. Smoke.
Nothing. Especially when you recall that once things alter
they cease to exist through all the endless years to come.
Then why such turmoil? To live your brief life rightly,
isn’t that enough?
The raw material you’re missing, the opportunities . . . !
What is any of this but training—training for your logos, in
life observed accurately, scientifically.
So keep at it, until it’s fully digested. As a strong stomach
digests whatever it eats. As a blazing fire takes whatever you
throw on it, and makes it light and flame.
32. That no one can say truthfully that you are not a
straightforward or honest person. That anyone who thinks
that believes a falsehood. The responsibility is all yours; no
one can stop you from being honest or straightforward.
Simply resolve not to go on living if you aren’t. It would be
contrary to the logos.
33. Given the material we’re made of, what’s the sanest thing
that we can do or say? Whatever it may be, you can do or say
it. Don’t pretend that anything’s stopping you.
You’ll never stop complaining until you feel the same
pleasure that the hedonist gets from self-indulgence—only
from doing what’s proper to human beings as far as
circumstances—inherent or fortuitous—allow. “Enjoyment” means doing as much of what your nature requires as you
can. And you can do that anywhere. A privilege not granted
to a cylinder—to determine its own action. Or to water, or
fire, or any of the other things governed by nature alone, or
by an irrational soul. Too many things obstruct them and get
in their way. But the intellect and logos are able to make
their way through anything in their path—by inborn capacity
or sheer force of will. Keep before your eyes the ease with
which they do this—the ease with which the logos is carried
through all things, as fire is drawn upward or a stone falls to
earth, as a cylinder rolls down an inclined plane.
That’s all you need. All other obstacles either affect the
lifeless body, or have no power to shake or harm anything
unless misperception takes over or the logos surrenders
voluntarily. Otherwise those they obstruct would be
degraded by them immediately. In all other entities, when
anything bad happens to them, it affects them for the worse. Whereas here a person is improved by it (if I can put it like
that)—and we admire him for reacting as a person should.
And keep in mind that nothing can harm one of nature’s
citizens except what harms the city he belongs to. And
nothing harms that city except what harms its law. And there
is no so-called misfortune that can do that. So long as the law
is safe, so is the city—and the citizen.
34. If you’ve immersed yourself in the principles of truth, the
briefest, most random reminder is enough to dispel all fear
and pain:
. . . leaves that the wind
Drives earthward; such are the generations of men.
Your children, leaves.
Leaves applauding loyally and heaping praise upon you, or
turning around and calling down curses, sneering and
mocking from a safe distance.
A glorious reputation handed down by leaves.
All of these “spring up in springtime”—and the wind
blows them all away. And the tree puts forth others to
replace them.
None of us have much time. And yet you act as if things
were eternal—the way you fear and long for them. . . .
Before long, darkness. And whoever buries you mourned
in their turn.
35. A healthy pair of eyes should see everything that can be
seen and not say, “No! Too bright!” (which is a symptom of
ophthalmia).
A healthy sense of hearing or smell should be prepared for
any sound or scent; a healthy stomach should have the same
reaction to all foods, as a mill to what it grinds.
So too a healthy mind should be prepared for anything.
The one that keeps saying, “Are my children all right?” or
“Everyone must approve of me” is like eyes that can only
stand pale colors, or teeth that can handle only mush.
36. It doesn’t matter how good a life you’ve led. There’ll
still be people standing around the bed who will welcome
the sad event.
Even with the intelligent and good. Won’t there be
someone thinking “Finally! To be through with that old
schoolteacher. Even though he never said anything, you could
always feel him judging you.” And that’s for a good man.
How many traits do you have that would make a lot of
people glad to be rid of you?
Remember that, when the time comes. You’ll be less
reluctant to leave if you can tell yourself, “This is the sort of
life I’m leaving. Even the people around me, the ones I spent
so much time fighting for, praying over, caring about—even
they want me gone, in hopes that it will make their own lives
easier. How could anyone stand a longer stay here?”
And yet, don’t leave angry with them. Be true to who you
are: caring, sympathetic, kind. And not as if you were being
torn away from life. But the way it is when someone dies
peacefully, how the soul is released from the body—that’s
how you should leave them. It was nature that bound you to
them—that tied the knot. And nature that now unties you.
I am released from those around me. Not dragged against
my will, but unresisting.
There are things that nature demands. And this is one of
them.
37. Learn to ask of all actions, “Why are they doing that?”
Starting with your own.
38. Remember that what pulls the strings is within—hidden
from us. Is speech, is life, is the person. Don’t conceive of
the rest as part of it—the skin that contains it, and the
accompanying organs. Which are tools—like a carpenter’s
axe, except that they’re attached to us from birth, and are no
more use without what moves and holds them still than the
weaver’s shuttle, the writer’s pencil, the driver’s whip.
Book 11
1. Characteristics of the rational soul:
Self-perception, self-examination, and the power to make
of itself whatever it wants.
It reaps its own harvest, unlike plants (and, in a different
way, animals), whose yield is gathered in by others.
It reaches its intended goal, no matter where the limit of its
life is set. Not like dancing and theater and things like that,
where the performance is incomplete if it’s broken off in the
middle, but at any point—no matter which one you pick—it
has fulfilled its mission, done its work completely. So that it
can say, “I have what I came for.”
It surveys the world and the empty space around it, and the
way it’s put together. It delves into the endlessness of time to
extend its grasp and comprehension of the periodic births and
rebirths that the world goes through. It knows that those who
come after us will see nothing different, that those who came
before us saw no more than we do, and that anyone with forty
years behind him and eyes in his head has seen both past and
future—both alike.
Also characteristic of the rational soul:
Affection for its neighbors. Truthfulness. Humility. Not to
place anything above itself—which is characteristic of law
as well. No difference here between the logos of rationality
and that of justice.
2. To acquire indifference to pretty singing, to dancing, to the
martial arts: Analyze the melody into the notes that form it,
and as you hear each one, ask yourself whether you’re
powerless against that. That should be enough to deter you.
The same with dancing: individual movements and
tableaux. And the same with the martial arts.
And with everything—except virtue and what springs from
it. Look at the individual parts and move from analysis to
indifference.
Apply this to life as a whole.
3. The resolute soul:
Resolute in separation from the body. And then in
dissolution or fragmentation—or continuity.
But the resolution has to be the result of its own decision,
not just in response to outside forces [like the Christians]. It
has to be considered and serious, persuasive to other people. Without dramatics.
4. Have I done something for the common good? Then I share
in the benefits.
To stay centered on that. Not to give up.
5. “And your profession?” “Goodness.” (And how is that to
be achieved, except by thought—about the world, about the
nature of people?)
6. First, tragedies. To remind us of what can happen, and that
it happens inevitably—and if something gives you pleasure
on that stage, it shouldn’t cause you anger on this one. You
realize that these are things we all have to go through, and
that even those who cry aloud “o Mount Cithaeron!” have to
endure them. And some excellent lines as well. These, for
example:
If I and my two children cannot move the gods
The gods must have their reasons
Or:
And why should we feel anger at the world?
And:
To harvest life like standing stalks of grain
and a good many others.
Then, after tragedy, Old Comedy: instructive in its
frankness, its plain speaking designed to puncture
pretensions. (Diogenes used the same tactic for similar
ends.)
Then consider the Middle (and later the New) Comedy
and what it aimed at—gradually degenerating into mere
realism and empty technique. There are undeniably good
passages, even in those writers, but what was the point of it
all—the script and staging alike?
7. It stares you in the face. No role is so well suited to
philosophy as the one you happen to be in right now.
8. A branch cut away from the branch beside it is
simultaneously cut away from the whole tree. So too a human
being separated from another is cut loose from the whole
community.
The branch is cut off by someone else. But people cut
themselves off—through hatred, through rejection—and don’t
realize that they’re cutting themselves off from the whole
civic enterprise.
Except that we also have a gift, given us by Zeus, who
founded this community of ours. We can reattach ourselves
and become once more components of the whole.
But if the rupture is too often repeated, it makes the
severed part hard to reconnect, and to restore. You can see
the difference between the branch that’s been there since the
beginning, remaining on the tree and growing with it, and the
one that’s been cut off and grafted back.
“One trunk, two minds.” As the gardeners put it.
9. As you move forward in the logos, people will stand in
your way. They can’t keep you from doing what’s healthy;
don’t let them stop you from putting up with them either. Take
care on both counts. Not just sound judgments, solid actions —tolerance as well, for those who try to obstruct us or give
us trouble in other ways.
Because anger, too, is weakness, as much as breaking
down and giving up the struggle. Both are deserters: the man
who breaks and runs, and the one who lets himself be
alienated from his fellow humans.
10. The natural can never be inferior to the artificial; art
imitates nature, not the reverse. In which case, that most
highly developed and comprehensive nature—Nature itself—
cannot fall short of artifice in its craftsmanship.
Now, all the arts move from lower goals to higher ones. Won’t Nature do the same?
Hence justice. Which is the source of all the other virtues.
For how could we do what justice requires if we are
distracted by things that don’t matter, if we are naive,
gullible, inconstant?
11. It’s the pursuit of these things, and your attempts to avoid
them, that leave you in such turmoil. And yet they aren’t
seeking you out; you are the one seeking them.
Suspend judgment about them. And at once they will lie
still, and you will be freed from fleeing and pursuing.
12. The soul as a sphere in equilibrium: Not grasping at
things beyond it or retreating inward. Not fragmenting
outward, not sinking back on itself, but ablaze with light and
looking at the truth, without and within.
13. Someone despises me.
That’s their problem.
Mine: not to do or say anything despicable.
Someone hates me. Their problem.
Mine: to be patient and cheerful with everyone, including
them. Ready to show them their mistake. Not spitefully, or to
show off my own self-control, but in an honest, upright way.
Like Phocion (if he wasn’t just pretending). That’s what we
should be like inside, and never let the gods catch us feeling
anger or resentment.
As long as you do what’s proper to your nature, and accept
what the world’s nature has in store—as long as you work
for others’ good, by any and all means—what is there that
can harm you?
14. They flatter one another out of contempt, and their desire
to rule one another makes them bow and scrape.
15. The despicable phoniness of people who say, “Listen,
I’m going to level with you here.” What does that mean? It
shouldn’t even need to be said. It should be obvious—
written in block letters on your forehead. It should be audible
in your voice, visible in your eyes, like a lover who looks
into your face and takes in the whole story at a glance. A
straightforward, honest person should be like someone who
stinks: when you’re in the same room with him, you know it.
But false straightforwardness is like a knife in the back.
False friendship is the worst. Avoid it at all costs. If
you’re honest and straightforward and mean well, it should
show in your eyes. It should be unmistakable.
16. To live a good life:
We have the potential for it. If we can learn to be
indifferent to what makes no difference. This is how we
learn: by looking at each thing, both the parts and the whole.
Keeping in mind that none of them can dictate how we
perceive it. They don’t impose themselves on us. They hover
before us, unmoving. It is we who generate the judgments—
inscribing them on ourselves. And we don’t have to. We
could leave the page blank—and if a mark slips through,
erase it instantly.
Remember how brief is the attentiveness required. And
then our lives will end.
And why is it so hard when things go against you? If it’s
imposed by nature, accept it gladly and stop fighting it. And
if not, work out what your own nature requires, and aim at
that, even if it brings you no glory.
None of us is forbidden to pursue our own good.
17. Source and substance of each thing. What it changes into,
and what it’s like transformed; that nothing can harm it.
18. i. My relationship to them. That we came into the world
for the sake of one another. Or from another point of view, I
came into it to be their guardian—as the ram is of the flock,
and the bull of the herd.
Start from this: if not atoms, then Nature—directing
everything. In that case, lower things for the sake of higher
ones, and higher ones for one another.
ii. What they’re like eating, in bed, etc. How driven they
are by their beliefs. How proud they are of what they
do.
iii. That if they’re right to do this, then you have no right
to complain. And if they aren’t, then they do it
involuntarily, out of ignorance. Because all souls are
prevented from treating others as they deserve, just as
they are kept from truth: unwillingly. Which is why they
resent being called unjust, or arrogant, or greedy—any
suggestion that they aren’t good neighbors.
iv. That you’ve made enough mistakes yourself. You’re
just like them.
Even if there are some you’ve avoided, you have the
potential.
Even if cowardice has kept you from them. Or fear of
what people would say. Or some equally bad reason.
v. That you don’t know for sure it is a mistake. A lot of
things are means to some other end. You have to know
an awful lot before you can judge other people’s actions
with real understanding.
vi. When you lose your temper, or even feel irritated:
that human life is very short. Before long all of us will
be laid out side by side.
vii. That it’s not what they do that bothers us: that’s a
problem for their minds, not ours. It’s our own
misperceptions. Discard them. Be willing to give up
thinking of this as a catastrophe . . . and your anger is
gone. How do you do that? By recognizing that you’ve
suffered no disgrace. Unless disgrace is the only thing
that can hurt you, you’re doomed to commit innumerable
offenses—to become a thief, or heaven only knows
what else.
viii. How much more damage anger and grief do than
the things that cause them.
ix. That kindness is invincible, provided it’s sincere—
not ironic or an act. What can even the most vicious
person do if you keep treating him with kindness and
gently set him straight—if you get the chance—
correcting him cheerfully at the exact moment that he’s
trying to do you harm. “No, no, my friend. That isn’t
what we’re here for. It isn’t me who’s harmed by that.
It’s you.” And show him, gently and without pointing
fingers, that it’s so. That bees don’t behave like this—or
any other animals with a sense of community. Don’t do
it sardonically or meanly, but affectionately—with no
hatred in your heart. And not ex cathedra or to impress
third parties, but speaking directly. Even if there are
other people around.
Keep these nine points in mind, like gifts from the nine
Muses, and start becoming a human being. Now and for
the rest of your life.
And along with not getting angry at others, try not to
pander either. Both are forms of selfishness; both of
them will do you harm. When you start to lose your
temper, remember: There’s nothing manly about rage.
It’s courtesy and kindness that define a human being—
and a man. That’s who possesses strength and nerves
and guts, not the angry whiners. To react like that brings
you closer to impassivity—and so to strength. Pain is
the opposite of strength, and so is anger. Both are things
we suffer from, and yield to.
. . . and one more thought, from Apollo:
x. That to expect bad people not to injure others is
crazy. It’s to ask the impossible. And to let them behave
like that to other people but expect them to exempt you
is arrogant—the act of a tyrant.
19. Four habits of thought to watch for, and erase from your
mind when you catch them. Tell yourself:
• This thought is unnecessary.
• This one is destructive to the people around you.
• This wouldn’t be what you really think (to say what you
don’t think—the definition of absurdity).
And the fourth reason for self-reproach: that the more
divine part of you has been beaten and subdued by the
degraded mortal part—the body and its stupid selfindulgence.
20. Your spirit and the fire contained within you are drawn
by their nature upward. But they comply with the world’s
designs and submit to being mingled here below. And the
elements of earth and water in you are drawn by their nature
downward. But are forced to rise, and take up a position not
their own. So even the elements obey the world—when
ordered and compelled—and man their stations until the
signal to abandon them arrives.
So why should your intellect be the only dissenter—the
only one complaining about its posting? It’s not as if anything
is being forced on it. Only what its own nature requires. And
yet it refuses to comply, and sets off in the opposite
direction. Because to be drawn toward what is wrong and
self-indulgent, toward anger and fear and pain, is to revolt
against nature. And for the mind to complain about anything
that happens is to desert its post. It was created to show
reverence—respect for the divine—no less than to act justly.
That too is an element of coexistence and a prerequisite for
justice.
21. “If you don’t have a consistent goal in life, you can’t live
it in a consistent way.”
Unhelpful, unless you specify a goal.
There is no common benchmark for all the things that
people think are good—except for a few, the ones that affect
us all. So the goal should be a common one—a civic one. If
you direct all your energies toward that, your actions will be
consistent. And so will you.
22. The town mouse and the country mouse. Distress and
agitation of the town mouse.
23. Socrates used to call popular beliefs “the monsters under
the bed”—only useful for frightening children with.
24. At festivals the Spartans put their guests’ seats in the
shade, but sat themselves down anywhere.
25. Socrates declining Perdiccas’s invitation “so as to avoid
dying a thousand deaths” (by accepting a favor he couldn’t
pay back).
26. This advice from Epicurean writings: to think continually
of one of the men of old who lived a virtuous life.
27. The Pythagoreans tell us to look at the stars at daybreak.
To remind ourselves how they complete the tasks assigned
them—always the same tasks, the same way. And their order,
purity, nakedness. Stars wear no concealment.
28. Socrates dressed in a towel, the time Xanthippe took his
cloak and went out. The friends who were embarrassed and
avoided him when they saw him dressed like that, and what
Socrates said to them.
29. Mastery of reading and writing requires a master. Still
more so life.
30. “. . . For you/Are but a slave and have no claim to
logos.”
31. “But my heart rejoiced.”
32. “And jeer at virtue with their taunts and sneers.”
33. Stupidity is expecting figs in winter, or children in old
age.
34. As you kiss your son good night, says Epictetus, whisper
to yourself, “He may be dead in the morning.”
Don’t tempt fate, you say.
By talking about a natural event? Is fate tempted when we
speak of grain being reaped?
35. Grapes.
Unripe . . . ripened . . . then raisins.
Constant transitions.
Not the “not” but the “not yet.”
36. “No thefts of free will reported.”[—Epictetus.]
37. “We need to master the art of acquiescence. We need to
pay attention to our impulses, making sure they don’t go
unmoderated, that they benefit others, that they’re worthy of
us. We need to steer clear of desire in any form and not try to
avoid what’s beyond our control.”
38. “This is not a debate about just anything,” he said, “but
about sanity itself.”
39. Socrates: What do you want, rational minds or irrational
ones?
—Rational ones.
Healthy or sick?
—Healthy.
Then work to obtain them.
—We already have.
Then why all this squabbling?

Book 12
1. Everything you’re trying to reach—by taking the long way
round—you could have right now, this moment. If you’d only
stop thwarting your own attempts. If you’d only let go of the
past, entrust the future to Providence, and guide the present
toward reverence and justice.
Reverence: so you’ll accept what you’re allotted. Nature
intended it for you, and you for it.
Justice: so that you’ll speak the truth, frankly and without
evasions, and act as you should—and as other people
deserve.
Don’t let anything deter you: other people’s misbehavior,
your own misperceptions, What People Will Say, or the
feelings of the body that covers you (let the affected part take
care of those). And if, when it’s time to depart, you shunt
everything aside except your mind and the divinity within . . .
if it isn’t ceasing to live that you’re afraid of but never
beginning to live properly . . . then you’ll be worthy of the
world that made you.
No longer an alien in your own land.
No longer shocked by everyday events—as if they were
unheard-of aberrations.
No longer at the mercy of this, or that.
2. God sees all our souls freed from their fleshly containers,
stripped clean of their bark, cleansed of their grime. He
grasps with his intelligence alone what was poured and
channeled from himself into them. If you learn to do the same,
you can avoid a great deal of distress. When you see through
the flesh that covers you, will you be unsettled by clothing, mansions, celebrity—the painted sets, the costume cupboard?
3. Your three components: body, breath, mind. Two are
yours in trust; to the third alone you have clear title.
If you can cut yourself—your mind—free of what other
people do and say, of what you’ve said or done, of the things
that you’re afraid will happen, the impositions of the body
that contains you and the breath within, and what the whirling
chaos sweeps in from outside, so that the mind is freed from
fate, brought to clarity, and lives life on its own recognizance —doing what’s right, accepting what happens, and speaking
the truth—
If you can cut free of impressions that cling to the mind,
free of the future and the past—can make yourself, as
Empedocles says, “a sphere rejoicing in its perfect
stillness,” and concentrate on living what can be lived
(which means the present) . . . then you can spend the time
you have left in tranquillity. And in kindness. And at peace
with the spirit within you.
4. It never ceases to amaze me: we all love ourselves more
than other people, but care more about their opinion than our
own. If a god appeared to us—or a wise human being, even —and prohibited us from concealing our thoughts or
imagining anything without immediately shouting it out, we
wouldn’t make it through a single day. That’s how much we
value other people’s opinions—instead of our own.
5. How is it that the gods arranged everything with such skill,
such care for our well-being, and somehow overlooked one
thing: that certain people—in fact, the best of them, the gods’
own partners, the ones whose piety and good works brought
them closest to the divine—that these people, when they die,
should cease to exist forever? Utterly vanished.
Well, assuming that’s really true, you can be sure they
would have arranged things differently, if that had been
appropriate. If it were the right thing to do, they could have
done it, and if it were natural, nature would have demanded
it. So from the fact that they didn’t—if that’s the case—we
can conclude that it was inappropriate.
Surely you can see yourself that to ask the question is to
challenge the gods’ fairness. And why would you be bringing
in fairness unless the gods are, in fact, fair—and absolutely
so?
And if they are, how could they have carelessly
overlooked something so unfair—so illogical—in setting up
the world?
6. Practice even what seems impossible.
The left hand is useless at almost everything, for lack of
practice. But it guides the reins better than the right. From
practice.
7. The condition of soul and body when death comes for us.
Shortness of life.
Vastness of time before and after.
Fragility of matter.
8. To see the causes of things stripped bare. The aim of
actions.
Pain. Pleasure. Death. Fame.
Who is responsible for our own restlessness.
That no one obstructs us.
That it’s all in how you perceive it.
9. The student as boxer, not fencer.
The fencer’s weapon is picked up and put down again.
The boxer’s is part of him. All he has to do is clench his
fist.
10. To see things as they are. Substance, cause and purpose.
11. The freedom to do only what God wants, and accept
whatever God sends us.
11a. What it’s made of.
12. The gods are not to blame. They do nothing wrong, on
purpose or by accident. Nor men either; they don’t do it on
purpose. No one is to blame.
13. The foolishness of people who are surprised by anything
that happens. Like travelers amazed at foreign customs.
14. Fatal necessity, and inescapable order. Or benevolent
Providence. Or confusion—random and undirected.
If it’s an inescapable necessity, why resist it?
If it’s Providence, and admits of being worshipped, then
try to be worthy of God’s aid.
If it’s confusion and anarchy, then be grateful that on this
raging sea you have a mind to guide you. And if the storm
should carry you away, let it carry off flesh, breath and all
the rest, but not the mind. Which can’t be swept away.
15. The lamp shines until it is put out, without losing its
gleam, and yet in you it all gutters out so early—truth, justice,
self-control?
16. When someone seems to have injured you:
But how can I be sure?
And in any case, keep in mind:
• that he’s already been tried and convicted—by himself.
(Like scratching your own eyes out.)
• that to expect a bad person not to harm others is like
expecting fig trees not to secrete juice, babies not to cry,
horses not to neigh—the inevitable not to happen.
What else could they do—with that sort of character?
If you’re still angry, then get to work on that.
17. If it’s not right, don’t do it. If it’s not true, don’t say it.
Let your intention be < . . . >
18. At all times, look at the thing itself—the thing behind the
appearance—and unpack it by analysis:
• cause
• substance
• purpose
• and the length of time it exists.
19. It’s time you realized that you have something in you
more powerful and miraculous than the things that affect you
and make you dance like a puppet.
What’s in my thoughts at this moment? Fear? Jealousy?
Desire? Feelings like that?
20. To undertake nothing:
i. at random or without a purpose;
ii. for any reason but the common good.
21. That before long you’ll be no one, and nowhere. Like all
the things you see now. All the people now living.
Everything’s destiny is to change, to be transformed, to
perish. So that new things can be born.
22. It’s all in how you perceive it. You’re in control. You
can dispense with misperception at will, like rounding the
point. Serenity, total calm, safe anchorage.
23. A given action that stops when it’s supposed to is none
the worse for stopping. Nor the person engaged in it either.
So too with the succession of actions we call “life.” If it ends
when it’s supposed to, it’s none the worse for that. And the
person who comes to the end of the line has no cause for
complaint. The time and stopping point are set by nature—
our own nature, in some cases (death from old age); or nature
as a whole, whose parts, shifting and changing, constantly
renew the world, and keep it on schedule.
Nothing that benefits all things can be ugly or out of place.
The end of life is not an evil—it doesn’t disgrace us. (Why
should we be ashamed of an involuntary act that injures no
one?). It’s a good thing—scheduled by the world, promoting
it, promoted by it.
This is how we become godlike—following God’s path,
and reason’s goals.
24. Three things, essential at all times:
i(a). your own actions: that they’re not arbitrary or
different from what abstract justice would do.
i(b). external events: that they happen randomly or by
design. You can’t complain about chance. You can’t
argue with Providence.
ii. what all things are like, from the planting of the seed
to the quickening of life, and from its quickening to its
relinquishment. Where the parts came from and where
they return to.
iii. that if you were suddenly lifted up and could see life
and its variety from a vast height, and at the same time
all the things around you, in the sky and beyond it, you’d
see how pointless it is. And no matter how often you
saw it, it would be the same: the same life forms, the
same life span.
Arrogance . . . about this?
25. Throw out your misperceptions and you’ll be fine. (And
who’s stopping you from throwing them out?)
26. To be angry at something means you’ve forgotten:
That everything that happens is natural.
That the responsibility is theirs, not yours.
And further . . .
That whatever happens has always happened, and
always will, and is happening at this very moment,
everywhere. Just like this.
What links one human being to all humans: not blood, or
birth, but mind.
And . . .
That an individual’s mind is God and of God.
That nothing belongs to anyone. Children, body, life
itself—all of them come from that same source.
That it’s all how you choose to see things.
That the present is all we have to live in. Or to lose.
27. Constantly run down the list of those who felt intense
anger at something: the most famous, the most unfortunate, the
most hated, the most whatever. And ask: Where is all that
now? Smoke, dust, legend . . . or not even a legend. Think of
all the examples: Fabius Catullinus in the country, Lusius
Lupus in the orchard, Stertinius at Baiae, Tiberius on Capri,
Velius Rufus . . . obsession and arrogance.
And how trivial the things we want so passionately are.
And how much more philosophical it would be to take what
we’re given and show uprightness, self-control, obedience to
God, without making a production of it. There’s nothing more
insufferable than people who boast about their own humility.
28. People ask, “Have you ever seen the gods you worship?
How can you be sure they exist?”
Answers:
i. Just look around you.
ii. I’ve never seen my soul either. And yet I revere it.
That’s how I know the gods exist and why I revere them—
from having felt their power, over and over.
29. Salvation: to see each thing for what it is—its nature and
its purpose.
To do only what is right, say only what is true, without
holding back.
What else could it be but to live life fully—to pay out
goodness like the rings of a chain, without the slightest gap.
30. Singular, not plural:
Sunlight. Though broken up by walls and mountains and a
thousand other things.
Substance. Though split into a thousand forms, variously
shaped.
Life. Though distributed among a thousand different
natures with their individual limitations.
Intelligence. Even if it seems to be divided.
The other components—breath, matter—lack any
awareness or connection to one another (yet unity and its
gravitational pull embrace them too).
But intelligence is uniquely drawn toward what is akin to
it, and joins with it inseparably, in shared awareness.
31. What is it you want? To keep on breathing? What about
feeling? desiring? growing? ceasing to grow? using your
voice? thinking? Which of them seems worth having?
But if you can do without them all, then continue to follow
the logos, and God. To the end. To prize those other things—
to grieve because death deprives us of them—is an obstacle.
32. The fraction of infinity, of that vast abyss of time, allotted
to each of us. Absorbed in an instant into eternity.
The fraction of all substance, and all spirit.
The fraction of the whole earth you crawl about on.
Keep all that in mind, and don’t treat anything as important
except doing what your nature demands, and accepting what
Nature sends you.
33. How the mind conducts itself. It all depends on that. All
the rest is within its power, or beyond its control—corpses
and smoke.
34. An incentive to treat death as unimportant: even people
whose only morality is pain and pleasure can manage that
much.
35. If you make ripeness alone your good . . .
If a few actions more or less, governed by the right logos,
are merely a few more or less . . .
If it makes no difference whether you look at the world for
this long or that long . . .
. . . then death shouldn’t scare you.
36. You’ve lived as a citizen in a great city. Five years or a
hundred—what’s the difference? The laws make no
distinction.
And to be sent away from it, not by a tyrant or a dishonest
judge, but by Nature, who first invited you in—why is that so
terrible?
Like the impresario ringing down the curtain on an actor:
“But I’ve only gotten through three acts . . . !”
Yes. This will be a drama in three acts, the length fixed by
the power that directed your creation, and now directs your
dissolution. Neither was yours to determine.
So make your exit with grace—the same grace shown to
you.
Notes
1.1 My grandfather Verus: Verus (1).
1.2 My father: Verus (2).
1.3 My mother: Lucilla.
1.4 My great-grandfather: Severus (1).
To avoid the public schools: Roman aristocrats normally preferred to
have their sons educated by private tutors (often specially trained
household slaves) who were considered safer and more reliable than the
professionalschoolmasters who taught all comers for a fee.
1.5 My first teacher: Not named and most likely a slave.
Not to support this side or that: Literally, “not to be a Green or a Blue;
not to support the parmularius [a gladiator with a small shield] or the
scutarius [who carried a larger shield].”
1.6 the camp-bed and the cloak: Symbols of an ascetic lifestyle. Marcus’s
sleeping arrangements are recorded by the Historia Augusta: “He used
to sleep on the ground, and his mother had a hard time convincing him to
sleep on a cot spread with skins.”
1.7 his own copy: It is unclear whether this refers to Arrian’s Discourses of
Epictetus or to a set of unpublished notes, perhaps taken by Rusticus
himself.
1.13 Domitius and Athenodotus: The anecdote Marcus refers to is unknown.
1.14 My brother: Probably a copyist’s error based on confusion between the
names Verus and Severus.
Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato: For the significance of these three figures as
Stoic exemplars see the Introduction.
1.16 My adopted father: Antoninus Pius. The sketch here seems to be a
development and expansion of the briefer assessment in 6.30.
Putting a stop to the pursuit of boys: This may be meant as a critique of
Antoninus’s predecessor, Hadrian (2), whose love affair with the youth
Antinoüs was notorious. Alternatively it might refer to legal restrictions on
pederasty (which was common in upper-class Greek and Roman society),
or to Antoninus’s own self-restraint.
The robe . . . the customs agent’s apology: These examples of
Antoninus’s modesty are too compressed and allusive to be intelligible to
anyone but Marcus himself.
as they say of Socrates: Marcus may be recalling a similar comment by
Xenophon, Memorabilia 1.3.14; Socrates’ ability to drink heavily without
any apparent effect is celebrated in Plato’s Symposium (179c, 220a).
Maximus’s illness: For Maximus see the Index of Persons; nothing is
known of his illness.
1.17 someone: Antoninus.
the kind of brother: Verus (3).
the honors they seemed to want: Marcus may be thinking of Herodes
Atticus and Fronto, both of whom held consulships in 143, soon after Marcus became the heir apparent. Perhaps also of Rusticus, who held a
second consulship in 162.
I never laid a finger: Household slaves were often exposed to sexual
abuse at the hands of their owners.
That I have the wife I do: Faustina.
at Caieta: A seaport on the west coast of Italy. The Greek text adds an
unintelligible phrase, which some scholars interpret as a reference to “an
oracle.”
“we need the help . . .”: Apparently a quotation, but not from any
surviving work.
2. On the River Gran, Among the Quadi: The notation is transmitted at the end
of Book 1, but is more likely to belong here. The Gran (or Hron) is a
tributary of the Danube flowing through modern-day Slovakia. The
Quadi were a Suebian tribe in the Morava River valley, subdued during
the Marcomannic Wars of the early 170s.
2. 2 Throw away . . . right now: These words are deleted or transposed
elsewhere by some editors.
2. 10 the ones committed out of desire are worse: Strictly speaking, this
assessment is in conflict with Stoic doctrine, which holds that there are
no degrees of wrongness; all wrong actions are equally wrong and it
makes no sense to speak of one as being “worse” than another.
2.13 “delving into . . .”: A line from the lyric poet Pindar (frg. 282), quoted also
by Plato, Theaetetus 173e.
3. In Carnuntum: Transmitted at the end of Book 2, but probably meant to head
Book 3. Carnuntum was a fortress on the Danube which housed the
Legio XIV Gemina and served as the seat of the governor of Upper
Pannonia. Marcus is known to have been in the area in 172 and 173.
3. 3 Chaldaeans: The Chaldaeans (Babylonians) had a special reputation as
astrologers.
Democritus: Apparently an error for another pre-Socratic philosopher,
Pherecydes, who was said to have been eaten by worms. (Democritus’s
name was often coupled with that of Heraclitus, which may explain Marcus’s slip here.)
Socrates: The “vermin” who killed Socrates are the Athenians who
prosecuted and condemned him.
3.6 as Socrates used to say: It is not clear whether Marcus is alluding to a
specific passage (perhaps Plato, Phaedo 83a–b) or merely to a general
impression of Socratic doctrine.
3.14 your Brief Comments: Evidently collections of anecdotes and/or quotations
put together by Marcus himself for his own use, like parts of the extant
Meditations.
3.15 They don’t realize . . . : The significance of this entry (particularly the last
phrase) is unclear.
3.16 people who do < . . . >: It seems clear that something is missing from the
text, perhaps deliberately omitted by a prudish copyist.
4.3 to ward off all < . . . >: The missing word must be something like “anxiety.”
“The world is nothing but change . . .”: Democritus frg. B 115.
4.18 < . . . > not to be distracted: The text as transmitted includes the words
“good,” “black character,” and “suspicion,” but no coherent sense can
be made of them.
4.19 You’re out of step . . . : The text of this sentence is disturbed and the
translation correspondingly uncertain.
4.23 The poet: Aristophanes frg. 112.
4.24 “If you seek tranquillity . . .”: Democritus frg. B 3.
4.30 A philosopher without clothes . . . : If the text is sound it is not easy to
interpret convincingly. The rendering here (which differs from most
previous versions) represents my best guess at the sense, but is far from
certain.
4.33 Camillus, Caeso, Volesus, Dentatus: Heroes of the Roman Republic (see
the Index of Persons). Only Camillus was well known; the others may
have been purposely chosen for their obscurity.
“unknown, unasked-for”: Homer, Odyssey 1.242.
4.41 “A little wisp of soul . . .”: Epictetus frg. 26 (presumably from one of the
lost books of the Discourses).
4.46 “When earth dies . . .”: Heraclitus frg. B 76.
“Those who have forgotten . . .”: idem. frg. B 71.
“They are at odds . . .”: idem. frg. B 72.
“they find alien . . .”: idem. frg. B 73.
“Our words and actions . . .”: idem. frg. B 74.
4.48 Helike, Pompeii, Herculaneum: Helike was a Greek city destroyed by an
earthquake and tidal wave in 373 B.C. Pompeii and its neighbor city
Herculaneum were destroyed by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in A.D.
79.
4.49a It’s unfortunate: It has been plausibly suggested that this entry is a
quotation from a lost section of Epictetus’s Discourses.
4.50 Caedicianus, Fabius, Julian, Lepidus: With the possible exception of
Caedicianus and Lepidus (see the Index of Persons), none of these
figures can be identified.
5 . 8 “the doctor”: Literally, “Asclepius.” Patients sleeping in his temple
sometimes had dream visions of the god and received suggestions for
treatment from him. But the name might simply indicate a human
physician.
5.10 a pervert: The Greek word (used also in 6.34) is a contemptuous term
referring to the passive partner in homosexual intercourse; it has no
exact English equivalent (“pervert,” although overly broad, at least has
the right tone). Marcus is probably using it as a generalized term of
abuse.
5.12 “so many goods . . .”: Proverbial: the rich man owns “so many goods he
has no place to shit.” The saying is at least as old as the fourth-century
B.C. comic poet Menander, who quotes it in the surviving fragments of
his play The Apparition.
5.29 If the smoke makes me cough: The metaphor is drawn from Epictetus,
Discourses 1.25.18.
5.31 “wrong and unworthy . . .”: Homer, Odyssey 4.690.
5.33 “gone from the earth . . .”: Hesiod, Works and Days 197.
5.36 Not to be overwhelmed: The remainder of this book is unintelligible in
places, perhaps because the end of the original papyrus roll suffered
accidental damage. I have divided the text into three separate sections,
but without great confidence that this is correct.
Like the old man: The reference is obscure. A scene from a lost tragedy?
6.13 Crates on Xenocrates: The meaning of this reference is unknown.
6.30 Take Antoninus as your model: The sketch that follows seems to be a
preliminary version of the longer portrait at 1.16.
6.34 perverts: See 5.10 note.
6.42 “those who sleep . . .”: Heraclitus frg. B 75.
the bad line in the play: Chrysippus frg. 1181 (= Plutarch, On Stoic SelfContradictions
13f.). Chrysippus compared the existence of evil to a
deliberately bathetic line in a comedy—bad in itself, but an essential part of
a good play.
7.12 not: The transmitted text reads “or,” but this can hardly be correct (compare
3.5).
7.15 Like gold or emerald or purple: Compare Epictetus, Discourses 1.2.17–
18: “You see yourself as one thread in a garment . . . But I want to be
the purple thread, the small, glistening one that enhances the others.”
7.24 “ . . . “ or in the end is put out: I have omitted a short phrase from which it
is impossible to extract any meaning.
7.31a “. . . all are relative . . .”: A paraphrase of Democritus frg. B 9, in which
qualities like sweetness or bitterness are said to be “relative” or
“conventional” rather than inherent (what tastes sweet to one person
may be bitter to another). Marcus apparently sees the observation as
compatible with the Stoic doctrine that “it’s all in how you perceive it”
(12.8), though he naturally rejects the subsequent reference to atoms.
The final phrase is corrupt beyond repair.
7.32 [On death]: The headings of this and the next two entries are probably not
Marcus’s own, but additions by a later reader.
7.35 “If his mind is filled . . .”: Plato, Republic 6.486a.
7.36 “Kingship . . .”: Antisthenes frg. 20b (also quoted by Epictetus, Discourses
4.6.20).
7.38 “And why should we feel anger . . .”: Euripides, frg. 287 (from the lost
Bellerophon quoted also at 11.6).
7.39 “May you bring joy . . .”: Source unknown; perhaps from a lost epic.
7.40 “To harvest life . . .”: Euripides, frg. 757 (from the lost Hypsipyle).
7.41 “If I and my two children . . .”: Euripides, frg. 208 (from the lost Antiope;
quoted also at 11.6).
7.42 “For what is just and good . . .”: Ibid., frg. 918 (from an unknown play).
7.43 No chorus of lamentation: This might be a quotation, like the preceding
entries, but if so, we do not know its source.
7.44 “Then the only proper response . . .”: Plato, Apology 28b.
7.45 “It’s like this . . .”: Ibid., 28d.
7.46 “But, my good friend . . .”: Plato, Gorgias 512d.
7.48 [Plato has it right]: The passage that follows does not correspond to
anything in Plato’s preserved writings, and it seems likely that the
phrase was inserted by a later reader who mistook it for a quotation.
7.50 “Earth’s offspring . . .”: Euripides, frg. 839 (from the lost Chrysippus).
7.51 “. . . with food and drink . . .”: Euripides, Suppliants 1110–1111.
7.51a “To labor cheerfully . . .”: From an unknown tragedy.
7.63 “Against our will . . .”: Epictetus, Discourses 1.28.4 (also 2.22.37),
paraphrasing Plato, Sophist 228c.
7.64 what Epicurus said: Epicurus frg. 447.
7.66 by spending the night out in the cold: This anecdote is told by Alcibiades in
Plato’s Symposium (220).
the man from Salamis: During the brief reign of the “Thirty Tyrants” at
Athens, Socrates was ordered to collaborate with the regime by arresting a
certain Leon, but refused; the story is told in Plato’s Apology (32c).
“swaggered about the streets”: A line from Aristophanes’ comedy
Clouds (362), which pokes fun at Socrates.
8.25 Verus . . . Lucilla: Marcus’s parents.
Hadrian: Most likely this refers to the rhetorician (Hadrian 1) rather than
the emperor (Hadrian 2).
8.35 We have various abilities . . . : The text here appears to be corrupt and the
translation is necessarily uncertain.
8.38 Look at it clearly: The text, meaning and articulation of entries 38 and 39
are very uncertain. Earlier editors printed the opening of 38 as the end
of 37, and took the phrases “Look at it clearly—if you can” and “To the
best of my judgment” as a single unit, though the resulting sentence
yields no coherent sense. I follow J. Dalfen in separating them.
8.39 “To the best of my judgment . . .”: I have placed the entry in quotation
marks on the basis of the opening phrase, which includes a parenthetical
“he [or “someone”] says.” This assumes that the phrase is correctly
transmitted (it is certainly not easy to construe), and that it should be
taken with what follows rather than what precedes, which is far from
certain (see previous note). However, the entry as a whole (an implicit
criticism of the Epicureans’ view of pleasure as the supreme good) does
not strike me as being typical of Marcus’s style, and I suspect he may
indeed be quoting some earlier writer.
8.41 “a sphere . . .”: Empedocles frg. B27, quoted in fuller form at 12.3.
8.57 Its beams get their name . . . : This (false) derivation is a typical example of
ancient etymology, a science in which the early Stoics were much
interested.
9.2 the “next best voyage”: A proverbial phrase meaning having to row when
one cannot sail.
9.24 “Odysseus in the Underworld”: The reference is to Book 11 of the
Odyssey, in which Odysseus descends to Hades and encounters the
shades of his companions who died at Troy.
9.29 Demetrius of Phalerum: It has been suggested that “of Phalerum” is a later
reader’s (mistaken) addition, and that Marcus had in mind the
Hellenistic monarch Demetrius Poliorcetes (“the city-sacker”). But
there seems no reason to doubt the transmitted text.
9.41 “During my illness . . .”: Epicurus frg. 191.
10.10 Sarmatians: One of the barbarian tribes Marcus spent his last decade
fighting.
10.21 “The earth knows longing . . .”: Euripides frg. 898.
10.23 “fencing a sheepfold . . .”: A paraphrase of Plato, Theaetetus 174d, in
which we are told that the philosopher will look down on a king as if the
latter were a humble shepherd.
10.31 When you look . . . : Most of the names mentioned here are mere ciphers
(see the Index of Persons for the best guess as to their identities), but
Marcus’s point does not depend on knowledge of the individuals.
10.33 as a cylinder rolls down: The comparison is taken from Chrysippus frg.
1000.
10.34 “. . . leaves that the wind . . .”: Homer, Iliad 6.147 ff., a very famous
passage.
11.3 [like the Christians]: This ungrammatical phrase is almost certainly a
marginal comment by a later reader; there is no reason to think Marcus
had the Christians in mind here. (See Introduction.)
11.6 “o Mount Cithaeron!”: Sophocles, Oedipus the King 1391 (Oedipus’s
anguished cry after blinding himself, invoking the mountain he was
abandoned on as a baby.)
“If I and my two children . . .”: See on 7.41.
“And why should we feel anger . . . ?”: See on 7.38.
“To harvest life . . .”: See on 7.40.
11.18 from Apollo: Often depicted as the leader of the nine Muses.
11.22 The town mouse: Aesop, Fables 297. The significance of the allusion is
unclear.
11.23 “the monsters under the bed”: Plato, Crito 46c and Phaedo 77e; Marcus
is probably drawing on Epictetus, Discourses 2.1.14.
11.25 Perdiccas’s invitation: In fact the ruler who invited Socrates to his court
was Perdiccas’s successor Archelaus (resigned 413–399).
11.26 This advice: Epicurus frg. 210.
11.28 Socrates dressed in a towel: The anecdote is not preserved.
11.30 “For you/Are but a slave . . .”: From a lost tragedy. Marcus twists what
must have been the sense of the original (“it is not for you to speak”) by
taking logos in its broader, philosophicalsense.
11.31 “But my heart rejoiced”: Homer, Odyssey 9.413.
11.32 “And jeer at virtue . . .”: Hesiod, Works and Days 186, but “virtue” is Marcus’s substitution. Hesiod has “and jeer at them,” in a completely
different context.
11.33 Stupidity is expecting figs: A paraphrase of Epictetus, Discourses
3.24.86.
11.34 As you kiss your son: Ibid., 3.24.88.
11.36 “No thefts of free will . . .”: Ibid., 3.22.105 (the attribution in the text is
probably an addition by a later reader who recognized the quotation).
11.37 “We need to master . . .”: Ibid., frg. 27.
11.38 “This is not a debate . . .”: Ibid., frg. 28.
11.39 Socrates: What do you want?: Source uncertain: perhaps from a lost
section of Epictetus.
12.3 “a sphere rejoicing . . .”: Empedocles frg. B 27 (also quoted at 8.41).
12.11a What it’s made of: Part of 12 in the manuscripts; placed in 11 by Meric
Casaubon. Perhaps an incomplete entry, perhaps an addition by a later
hand.
12.17 Let your intention be < . . . >: The division between Chapters 17 and 18 is
unclear, and it seems likely that some text has been lost.
12.27 Fabius Catullinus et al.: Most of the references are obscure; see the
Index of Persons for what can be guessed of them.
12.34 people whose only morality . . . : The Epicureans.
Index of Persons
This list covers only persons named, referred to, or quoted in the text of the Meditations itself.
GRIPPA: Roman general; adviser and close associate of AUGUSTUS, whose
daughter he married. (8.31)
LCIPHRON: Not certainly identified, although the context makes it clear that he
must be a contemporary of Marcus’s. He might be the Alciphron who
authored a surviving collection of imaginary letters from courtesans,
fishermen, etc., or a philosopher from Magnesia on the Maeander, quoted
twice by the third-century antiquarian Athenaeus. (10.31)
LEXANDER (1) “THE LITERARY CRITIC”: A Greek from Cotiaeum in Syria,
teacher of the great orator Aelius Aristides, as well as Marcus. (1.10)
LEXANDER (2) “THE PLATONIST”: A literary figure, mockingly dubbed
Alexander Peloplaton (“The Play-Doh Plato”) by his rivals. He served as
head of the Greek side of the imperialsecretariat. (1.12)
LEXANDER (3) “THE GREAT”: (356–323 B.C.), ruler of Macedon (336–323)
who conquered much of the Near and Middle East before dying at the age of
thirty-three. His career was a favorite topic for moralizers and rhetoricians.
(3.3, 6.24, 8.3, 9.29, 10.27)
NTISTHENES: Follower of SOCRATES and forerunner of the Cynic school
(quoted 7.36).
NTONINUS: Titus Aurelius Antoninus Pius, Roman emperor (138–161). He
adopted Marcus in 138 at the age of sixteen (1.16, 1.17, 4.33, 6.30, 8.25, 9.21,
10.27). Marcus also refers to himself by this name (6.44).
POLLONIUS: Apollonius of Chalcedon, Stoic philosopher and one of Marcus’s
teachers. (1.8, 1.17)
RCHIMEDES: Mathematician, scientist and engineer (c. 287–212 B.C.) from the
Greek city of Syracuse in Sicily, known especially for his work on
hydrostatics. (6.47)
REIUS: Stoic philosopher prominent at the court of AUGUSTUS. (8.31)
RISTOPHANES: Athenian comic playwright (c. 455–c. 386 B.C.). Eleven of his
approximately forty comedies survive, and are characterized by fantastic
plots, scatological dialogue, outrageous politicalsatire, and elegant choral
songs. (quoted 4.23, 7.66)
SCLEPIUS: Greek god of medicine. (6.43; compare 5.8 and note)
THENODOTUS: A Stoic philosopher and teacher of FRONTO. (1.13)
UGUSTUS: (63 B.C.–A.D. 14). Born Gaius Octaviaus, great-nephew and
adopted son of Julius CAESAR. He attained power following Caesar’s
assassination and became sole ruler of the Roman world after defeating
Caesar’s lieutenant Marcus Antonius at the battle of Actium in 31 B.C.
Through his lieutenants AGRIPPA and MAECENAS he was responsible for
major civic improvements and an active program of literary and artistic
patronage. (4.33, 8.5, 8.31)
ACCHEIUS: Platonic philosopher. (1.6)
ENEDICTA: Unknown, but she and THEODOTUS were most likely household
slaves. (1.17)
RUTUS: Marcus Junius Brutus (85–42 B.C.), Roman aristocrat and politician
who led the conspiracy to assassinate Julius CAESAR in 44 B.C. and
committed suicide when the battle of Philippi ended hopes of restoring the
Republic. (1.14)
AEDICIANUS: Perhaps identical with a governor of Dacia in the 120s and 130s.
(4.50)
AESAR: Gaius Julius Caesar (100–44 B.C.), Roman politician and general who
marched on Rome in 49 B.C., precipitating a civil war against forces loyal to
POMPEY and the Senate. After the defeat of the Republican forces at the
battle of Pharsalia and the murder of Pompey he was made dictator for life,
but assassinated in 44 B.C. (3.3, 8.3)
AESO: Unknown, though obviously a figure from Republican history. (4.33)
AMILLUS: Marcus Furius Camillus, the (perhaps mythical) fourth-century B.C.
general who saved Rome when it was under attack by invading Gauls. (4.33)
ATO (1): Marcus Porcius Cato “the Elder,” consul and censor in the second
century B.C.; author of a surviving work on agriculture and a lost history. He
was an emblem of Roman moral rectitude and rough virtue. (4.33)
ATO (2): Marcus Porcius Cato “the Younger” (95–46 B.C.), great-grandson of
Cato (1), a senator and well-known Stoic in the late Republic. He fought on
the Republican side against Julius CAESAR and committed suicide after the
battle of Thapsus. He was immortalized in the poet Lucan’s epic The Civil
War, and became an emblem of Stoic resistance to tyranny. (1.14)
ATULUS: Cinna Catulus is named, along with MAXIMUS, as a Stoic mentor of
Marcus’s by the Historia Augusta, but nothing else is known of him. (1.13)
ECROPS: Legendary founder of Athens. (4.23)
ELER: Rhetorician who taught both Marcus and Lucius VERUS. (8.25)
HABRIAS: Evidently an associate of HADRIAN (2), like DIOTIMUS, but not
otherwise known. (8.37)
HARAX: Perhaps Charax of Pergamum, a historian known from other sources
to have been active in the second or third century. (8.25)
HRYSIPPUS: Stoic philosopher (280–207 B.C.), succeeded Zeno and Cleanthes
as leader of the school. His writings laid out the fundamental doctrines of
early Stoicism. (6.42, 7.19)
LOTHO: One of the three Fates of Greek mythology who are imagined as
spinning or weaving human fortunes. (4.34)
RATES: Cynic philosopher (c. 365–285 B.C.) and disciple of DIOGENES. (6.13)
RITO: Most likely the physician Titus Statilius Crito, active under Trajan.
(10.31)
ROESUS: Sixth-century king of Lydia, famous for his wealth and power until his
kingdom fell to the Persians. (10.27)
EMETER: Greek goddess of agriculture. (6.43)
EMETRIUS (1) OF PHALERUM: Fourth-century B.C. philosopher, student of
THEOPHRASTUS and governor of Athens under Macedonian rule. (9.29)
EMETRIUS (2) THE PLATONIST: Probably not Demetrius (1), who was an
adherent of the Peripatetic school, not a Platonist. A Cynic philosopher
banished by VESPASIAN has also been suggested, but the reference is more
likely to a contemporary figure now unknown. (8.25)
EMOCRITUS: Pre-Socratic philosopher (c. 460–370 B.C.) best known for
developing the theory of atoms later adopted by the Epicureans. (3.3; quoted
4.3, 4.24, 7.31a)
ENTATUS: Manius Curius Dentatus, third-century B.C. Roman general. (4.33)
IOGENES: Greek philosopher (c. 400–c. 325 B.C.) and founder of the Cynic
school, notable for his extreme ascetic lifestyle and contempt for social
conventions. (8.3, 11.6)
IOGNETUS: Marcus’s drawing teacher (according to the Historia Augusta),
though the entry suggests that he played a greater role in Marcus’s
development than this might suggest. (1.6)
ION: Sicilian aristocrat, a protégé of Plato, who saw in him a potential
philosopher-king. (1.14)
IOTIMUS: Evidently an associate of HADRIAN (2), not otherwise known. (8.25,
8.37)
OMITIUS: Unidentified, perhaps a student of ATHENODOTUS. (1.13)
MPEDOCLES: Fifth-century B.C. Greek philosopher and poet who regarded the
natural world as the result of constant mingling and separating of four basic
elements. (quoted 8.41, 12.3)
PICTETUS: Stoic philosopher (c. 55–c. 135), a former slave from Phrygia who
was among the most influential figures in later Stoicism. A record of his
lectures and discussions (the Discourses) was published by his student
Arrian, along with an abridged version (the Encheiridion, or “Handbook”).
See also Introduction. (1.7, 7.19; quoted or paraphrased 4.41, 5.29, 7.63,
11.33–34, 11.36–38; cf. 4.49a and note)
PICURUS: Greek philosopher (341–270 B.C.) and founder of one of the two
great Hellenistic philosophicalsystems. Epicureans identified pleasure as the
supreme good in life and viewed the world as a random conglomeration of
atoms, not ruled by any larger providence. (quoted 7.64, 9.41; compare
11.26)
PITYNCHANUS: Perhaps a slave or freedman of HADRIAN (2). (8.25)
UDAEMON: Perhaps to be identified with a literary official prominent under
Hadrian (2). (8.25)
UDOXUS: Greek mathematician and astronomer active in the fourth century
B.C. (6.47)
UPHRATES: Perhaps the philosopher mentioned by Pliny the Younger (Letters
1.10) and evidently close to HADRIAN (2), but he might be a later imperial
official mentioned by Galen. (10.31)
URIPIDES: Athenian playwright (480s–407/6 B.C.); some twenty of his
tragedies are still extant. His plays were controversial in his lifetime, but in
subsequent centuries he was among the most popular of Greek authors,
thanks in large part to his quotability and accessible style. (quoted 7.38, 7.40–
42, 7.50–51, 11.6)
UTYCHES: Unknown; the comparison with SATYRON does not help us identify
him. (10.31)
UTYCHION: Not certainly identified, unless the name is a slip for the
grammarian Eutychius Proculus. (10.31)
ABIUS: Unidentified, perhaps identical with FABIUSCATULLINUS. (4.50)
ABIUSCATULLINUS: Unknown. Perhaps to be identified with the FABIUS of
4.50. (12.27)
AUSTINA: Wife of ANTONINUS Pius (8.25). Marcus married their daughter,
also Faustina (1.17).
RONTO: Marcus Cornelius Fronto (c. 95–c. 166), rhetorician from Cirta in
North Africa, and a key figure in Marcus’s education. Portions of his letters
to Marcus survive in two palimpsest manuscripts discovered in the early
nineteenth century. (1.11)
ADRIAN (1): Prominent rhetorician; no relation to the emperor. (8.25)
ADRIAN (2): Roman emperor (117–138), best known for his travels and
cultural interests; adopted ANTONINUS as his heir on the condition that the
latter adopt Marcus and Lucius VERUS. (4.33, 8.5, 8.37, 10.27)
ELVIDIUS: Helvidius Priscus (died c. 75), son-in-law of THRASEA Paetus,
exiled and later executed for his opposition to the emperor VESPASIAN. (1.14)
ERACLITUS: Pre-Socratic philosopher (active c. 500 B.C.) from the city of
Ephesus, famous for his cryptic and paradoxical utterances. His exaltation of
the logos as a cosmic power and his identification of fire as the primal
substance were important influences on the Stoics (see also Introduction).
According to the third-century A.D. biographer Diogenes Laertius, he died of
dropsy, which he tried to cure by immersing himself in manure; this account
is almost certainly a later fiction. (3.3, 6.47, 8.3; quoted or paraphrased 4.46,
6.42)
IPPARCHUS: Second-century B.C. Greek astronomer. (6.47)
IPPOCRATES: Greek doctor active in the fifth century B.C.; various medical
writings are transmitted under his name, as is the Hippocratic Oath still
administered to doctors. (3.3)
YMEN: Unknown; the comparison with SATYRON does not help identify him.
(10.31)
ULIAN: This may be a friend of FRONTO’s, Claudius Julianus, a proconsul of
Asia at about this period. (4.50)
EPIDUS: This might perhaps be the Roman aristocrat who briefly shared power
with Marcus Antonius and the future emperor AUGUSTUS, but the context
suggests an older contemporary of Marcus’s. (4.50)
UCILLA: Marcus’s mother (d. 155/161). (1.3, 1.17, 8.25, 9.21)
USIUS LUPUS: Unknown. (12.27)
AECENAS: Adviser and unofficial minister of culture to AUGUSTUS; patron of
the poets Vergil and Horace, among others. (8.31)
ARCIANUS: Unknown philosopher. (1.6)
AXIMUS: Claudius Maximus. Roman consul in the early 140s. Governor of
Upper Pannonia in the early 150s. Later in that decade he governed North
Africa, where he served as judge in the trial of the novelist Apuleius for
sorcery. (1.15, 1.16, 1.17, 8.25)
ENIPPUS: Cynic philosopher (early third century B.C.) from Gadara in Syria.
He features as a character in many of the satirical dialogues of Lucian.
(6.47)
ONIMUS: Fourth-century B.C. Cynic philosopher and student of DIOGENES.
(2.15)
ERO: Roman emperor (54–68); his name was a byword for tyranny and
cruelty. (3.16)
RIGANION: Unknown; most likely an imperialslave or freedman. (6.47)
ANTHEIA: Mistress of Lucius VERUS, mentioned in several works by the
satirist Lucian. (8.37)
ERDICCAS: King of Macedon (c. 450–413 B.C.). (11.25)
ERGAMOS: Evidently an associate of Lucius VERUS, perhaps a slave or lover.
(8.37)
HALARIS: Sixth-century B.C. dictator of Agrigento in Sicily, notorious for his
cruelty. (3.16)
HILIP: King of Macedon (359–336 B.C.) and father of ALEXANDER THE
GREAT. (9.29, 10.27)
HILISTION: Unknown, most likely an imperialslave or freedman, though a
contemporary mime writer of this name is also known. (6.47)
HOCION: Athenian general and statesman of the fourth century B.C. He was
eventually sentenced to death for treason, and before his execution
supposedly asked his son to forgive the Athenians for condemning him.
(11.13)
HOEBUS: Unknown, most likely an imperialslave or freedman. (6.47)
LATO: Athenian philosopher (c. 429–347 B.C.), disciple of SOCRATES and
author of philosophical dialogues in which the latter is portrayed debating with
his disciples and other contemporary figures. The most famous of these is
perhaps the Republic, in which he envisions an idealsociety. (7.48, 9.29,
10.23; quoted 7.44–46)
OMPEY: Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (106–48 B.C.), Roman politician and
general who rose to power in the 60s on the basis of a series of successful
campaigns in the East. His brief political alliance with Julius CAESAR gave
way to mutual rivalry and suspicion. When Caesar’s march on Rome
precipitated civil war in 49, Pompey led the senatorial resistance. Following
his defeat at the battle of Pharsalus, he fled to Egypt, where he was
murdered. (3.3, 8.3; family 8.31)
YTHAGORAS: Greek mathematician, philosopher, and mystic of the late sixth
century B.C. He founded a religious community in southern Italy whose
members were known especially for their devotion to music and geometry.
(6.47; compare 11.27)
USTICUS: Quintus Junius Rusticus, twice consul and city prefect of Rome in
the mid-160s. His influence on Marcus is attested by the Historia Augusta,
although the reference to him in 1.17 suggests that their relationship had its
ups and downs. (1.7, 1.17)
ATYRON: Unknown, though evidently a contemporary of Marcus. (10.31)
CIPIO: Either Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus (c. 235–183 B.C.), who
defeated Hannibal in the Second Punic War, or his grandson by adoption,
Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus (185/4–129 B.C.), the conqueror of
Carthage in the Third Punic War. (4.33)
ECUNDA: Wife of MAXIMUS. (8.25)
EVERUS (1): Lucius Catilius Severus, Marcus’s great-grandfather. (1.4)
EVERUS (2): Gnaeus Claudius Severus Arabianus from Pompeiopolis in Asia Minor, consul in 146; his son (perhaps the Severus of 10.31) married one of
Marcus’s daughters. He was an adherent of the Peripatetic school, which
traced its heritage back to Aristotle. (1.14)
EXTUS: Sextus of Chaeronea, Stoic philosopher, teacher of both Marcus and
Lucius VERUS, and nephew of the great biographer and antiquarian Plutarch.
(1.9)
ILVANUS: Perhaps Lamia Silvanus, a son-in-law of Marcus. (10.31)
OCRATES: Athenian philosopher (469–399 B.C.), teacher of PLATO. He spent
most of his life in his native city, and served with distinction in the
Peloponnesian War against Sparta. Although associated with several
members of the aristocratic junta that ruled Athens after its defeat in 404, he
refused to participate in their atrocities. He was executed by the Athenians
on a charge of impiety following the restoration of democracy; Plato’s
Apology purports to give his speech at the trial. (1.16, 3.3, 3.6, 6.47, 7.19,
7.66, 8.3, 11.23, 11.25, 11.28, 11.39)
OCRATICUS: Unknown; the comparison with SATYRON does not help identify
him. (10.31)
TERTINIUS: Not certainly identified. Tacitus mentions an army officer of this
name in the reign of Tiberius. But the reference to Baiae (a Roman resort on
the Bay of Naples) suggests a more likely candidate a generation or so later:
the wealthy Neapolitan physician Quintus Stertinius, mentioned by Pliny the
Elder (Natural History 29.7). (12.27)
ANDASIS: Philosopher mentioned along with one Marcianus; neither is
otherwise known. Some have suggested a scribe’s error for Basilides, listed
among Marcus’s teachers by other sources. (1.6)
ELAUGES: Apparently a lesser disciple of SOCRATES, unless the reference is to
the son of PYTHAGORAS by this name. (7.66)
HEODOTUS: Unknown, but he and BENEDICTA were most likely household
slaves. (1.17)
HEOPHRASTUS: Philosopher (c. 371–c. 287 B.C.) who succeeded Aristotle as
head of the Peripatetic school. (2.10)
HRASEA: Publius Clodius Thrasea Paetus (d. 66), Roman aristocrat (consul 56)
and father-in-law of HELVIDIUS Priscus. His opposition to the regime of
NERO (by whom he was eventually forced to commit suicide) was informed
by Stoic philosophy and in particular by the example of the younger CATO
(2), of whom he wrote a biography. (1.14)
IBERIUS: Roman emperor (14–37) who succeeded AUGUSTUS. Late in his
reign he withdrew to a private estate on the island of Capri; his alleged
excesses there are recorded in the biography of him by Suetonius. (12.27)
RAJAN: Marcus Ulpius Traianus, Roman general and emperor (98–117).
(4.32)
ROPAEOPHORUS: Perhaps a contemporary senator named in an inscription
from Perinthus. (10.31)
ELIUSRUFUS: Addressee of one of FRONTO’s letters, but otherwise unknown.
(12.27)
ERUS (1): Marcus Annius Verus (d. 138), grandfather of Marcus. He was
three times consul (the last two in 121 and 126); he also served as city
prefect of Rome about this time. After the death of his wife he evidently took
a concubine who helped raise Marcus. (1.1, 1.17, 9.21)
ERUS (2): Marcus Annius Verus, father of Marcus and husband of LUCILLA.
He died sometime between 130 and 135. (1.2, 8.25)
ERUS (3): Lucius Aurelius Verus (130–169), son of HADRIAN (2)’s intended
successor, Lucius Aelius. Originally named Lucius Ceionius Commodus, he
was adopted along with Marcus by Antoninus Pius and on Antoninus’s death
became co-emperor with Marcus. He was entrusted with the conduct of the
Parthian War, and campaigned with Marcus on the northern frontier before
his sudden death on the way back to Rome. (1.17, 8.37)
ESPASIAN: Roman emperor (69–79). His reign represented a period of stability
after the power struggle that followed the death of NERO, but he came into
conflict with some members of the senatorial class, notably the Stoic
HELVIDIUS Priscus. (4.32)
OLESUS: Traditionalsurname in the Valerius clan, which produced a number
of figures prominent in early historical accounts. Which one Marcus has in
mind is uncertain. (4.33)
ANTHIPPE: Wife of SOCRATES and proverbially a shrew. (11.28)
ENOCRATES: Platonic philosopher and head of the Academy at the end of the
fourth century B.C. (6.13)
ENOPHON: Probably a contemporary doctor mentioned by Galen. (10.31)
EUS: Sky god and head of the Greek pantheon; Marcus refers to him only
rarely and normally prefers a vaguer formulation such as “God” or “the
gods.” (4.23, 5.7, 5.8, 11.8)
ABOUT THE TRANSLATOR
GREGORY HAYS is assistant professor of classics at the
University of Virginia. He has published articles and
reviews on various ancient writers and is currently
completing a translation and critical study of the
mythographer Fulgentius.
THE MODERN LIBRARY EDITORIAL BOARD
Maya Angelou
DanielJ. Boorstin
A. S. Byatt
Caleb Carr
Christopher Cerf
Ron Chernow
Shelby Foote
Stephen Jay Gould
Vartan Gregorian
Richard Howard
Charles Johnson
Jon Krakauer
Edmund Morris
Joyce Carol Oates
Elaine Pagels
John Richardson
Salman Rushdie
Oliver Sacks
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.
Carolyn See
William Styron
Gore Vidal
2002 Modern Library Edition
Introduction and notes copyright © 2002 by Gregory Hays
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
Published in the United States by Modern Library, a division of RandomHouse, Inc., New
York, and simultaneously in Canada by RandomHouse of Canada Limited, Toronto.
MODERN LIBRARYand the TORCHBEARER Design are registered trademarks of Random
House, Inc.
LIBRARYOF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Marcus Aurelius, Emperor of Rome, 121–180.
[Meditations. English]
Meditations / Marcus Aurelius; translated, and with an introduction, by Gregory Hays.
p. cm.
e-ISBN 1-58836-173-X
1. Ethics. 2. Stoics. 3. Life. I. Hays, Gregory. II. Title.
B580.H3 M3713 2002
188—dc21 2001057947
Modern Library website address: www.modernlibrary.com
v1.0







I
THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY
FOtmDKD BY JAMES LOEB, IX.D. KDITED BT
tT. E, PAGE, C.H., LITT.D.
+ E. CAPPS, PH.D., LL.D. fW. H. D. ROUSE, litt.d. L, A. POST, M.A. E. H. WARMINGTON, m.a., f.b.hist.30c.
EPICTETUS

EPICTETUS
THE DISCOURSES AS REPORTED
BY ARRIAN, THE MANUAL,
AND FRAGMENTS
WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
W. A. OLDFATHER
DNIVKBaiTT OF 1U.IS018
EN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. I DISCX>UBSES, BOOKS I AND n
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
HARVARD UNIVTIRSITY PRESS
LONDON
WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
MCMLTI
First printed 1925
Reprinted 1946, 1956
Printed in Great Britain
CONTENTS
PAOS
INTKODUCTION ^^
DISCOURSES, BOOK I *
DISCOCBSES, BOOK II 209 INDEX *37

I
INTRODUCTION
Slave, poor as Irus, hailing as I trod,
I, Epictetiis, ivas the friend of God.
^
Epictetus was a slave woman's son, and for many
years a slave himself. ^ The tone and temper of
his whole life were determined thereby. An all- engulfing passion for independence and freedom so
^ AovAo5 *Ew/(CTjjTos ytySfiTjv Kal crZjj.' avdinjpos Kal Tfviriy ^Ipos Kou (p'lKos adavaTots. An anouymous epigram (John
Chrys.. PairoL Gr. LX. Ill; Macrob. ScU. 1. 11,45; Anth.
Pitl. VII. 676), as translated bj' H. Macnaghten. The ascrip- tion to Leonidas is merel}- a palaeographical blunder in part
of the MS. tradition, that to Epictetus himself (by Macrobius)
a patent absurdity.
^ This is the explicit testimony of an undated but fairly
early inscription from Pisidia (J. R. S. Sterrett: Papers
of the Amer. School of Class. Stud, a^ Ath<ns, 1884-5, 3, 315 f. ; G. Kaibel: Hermes, 1888, 23, 542 ff.), and of Palladius
(Ps.-Callisthenes, III. 10, ed. C. Muller), and is distinctly
implied by a phrase in a letter professedly aildressed to him
by one of the Philostrati (Ep. 69: exXateai'tadai ris el kcu tIvwv yi-yovas). I see, therefore, no reason to doubt the statement, as does Schenkl (2nd ed., p. xvi). The phrase
^ov\oi...yiv6in)v in the epigram cited above cannot be used
as certain evidence, because yiyvtadai, as Schenkl observes, too freqnentlj' equals eli'a4 in the poets, but, in view of the other testimony, it is probable that servile origin was what
the author of it had in mind.—There is little reason to think, with Martha {Les Moralistes, etc., 159), that Epictetus was not his real name, and that the employment of it is indicative of a modesty so real that it sought even a kind of anonymity, since the designation is by no means restricted
to slaves, while his modesty, because coupled with Stoic straightforwardness, is far removed from the shrinking
humility that seeks self efifacemeut,
vii A2
INTRODUCTION
preoccupied him in his youth, that throughout his life he was obsessed with the fear of restraint, and
tended to regard mere liberty, even in its negative
aspect alone, as almost the highest conceivable
good. It is perhaps no less noteworthy that he came from Hierapolis in Phrygia. From of old the
Phrygians had conceived of their deities with a singular intensity and entered into their worship
with a passion that was often fanaticism, and
sometimes downright frenzy. It is, therefore, not
unnatural that the one Greek philosopher who,
despite the monistic and necessitarian postulates of
his philosophy, conceived of his God in as vivid a fashion as the writers of the New Testament, and
almost as intimately as the founder of Christianity
himself, should have inherited the passion for a personal
god from the folk and land of his nativity.^
Beside these two illuminating facts, the other
details of his life history are of relatively little importance.
He was owned for a time by Epaphroditus,
the freedman and administrative secretary of
Nero, and it was while yet in his service that he
began to take lessons from Musonius Rufus, the
greatest Stoic teacher of the age, whose influence was the dominant one in his career.^ He was of
* It is noteworthy, as Lagrange, p. 201, observes, that Montanus, who soon after the time of Epictetus " threatened
Christianity with the invasion of undisciplined spiritual
graces," was also a Phrygian.
* So many passages in Epictetus can be paralleled closely
from the remaining fragments of Rufus (as Epictetus always
calls him) that there can be no doubt but the system of thought in the pupil is little more than an echo, with
changes of emphasis due to the personal equation, of that of the master.
INTRODUCTION
feeble health, and lame, the latter probably because
of the brutality of a master in his early years ; ^
^ This is generally doubted nowadays, especially since Bentley's emphatic pronouncement (cf. Trans. Am. Philol. Assoc., 1921, 53, 42) in favour of the account in Suidas,
to the effect that his lameness was the result of rheumatism.
Ceteris paribus one would, of course, accept as probable the
less sensational story. But it requires unusual powers of credulity to believe Suidas against any authority whomsoever,
and in this case the other authorities are several,
early, and excellent. In the first place Celsus (in Origen,
contra C'elsum, VII, 53), who was probably a younger
contemporary of Epictetus and had every occasion to be
well informed; further, Origen (I.e.), who clearly accepted
and believed the story, since his very answer to the argument admits the authenticity of the account, while
the easiest or most convincing retort would have been to deny it ; then Gregory of Nazianzus and his brother
Caesarius (in a number of places, see the teslimonia in Schenkl*, pp viii—ix ; of course the absurdities in PseudoNonnus,
Cosmas of Jerusalem, Elias of Crete, et id genus omne, have no bearing eitlier way). Now the fact that such men as Origen and Gregory accepted and propagated the account (even though Epictetus, and in this particular instance especially, had been exploited as a pagan saint, the equal or the superior of even Jesus himself) is sufficient to show that the best informed Christians of the third and
fourth centuries knew of no other record. To my feeling
it is distinctly probable that the denial of the incident may have emanated from some over-zealous Christian, in a period of less scrupulous apologetics, who thought to take
down the Pagans a notch or two. The very brief statement
in Simplicius, "that he was lame from an early period of
his life" (Oomm. on the Encheiridion, 102b Heins.), establishes nothing and would agree perfectly with either story. The
connection in which the words occur would make any
explanatory digression unnatural, and, whereas similar conciseness in Plutarch might perhaps argue ignorance of further details, such an inference would be false for Simplicius, the dullness of whose commentary is so por- tentous that it cannot be explained as merely the unavoidable
ix
INTRODUCTION
long unmarried, until in his old age he took a wife
to help him bring up a little child whose parents,
friends of his, were about to expose it ; ^ so simple
in his style of living, that in Rome he never locked
the doors of a habitation, whose only furniture was
said to be a pallet and a rush mat, and in Nicopolis
(in Epirus, opposite Actium) contented himself with an earthenware lamp after the theft of his iron one. Of the external aspects of his career it should
be noted that he had a recognized position as a philosopher when Domitian banished all such
persons from Rome (presumably in a.d. 89 or 92);
that he settled in Nicopolis, where he conducted
what seems to have been a fairly large and wellregarded
school ; that he travelled a little, probably
to Olympia, and certainly once to Athens.^ In
* He had been stung, no doubt, by the bitter and in his case unfair gibe of Demonax, who, on hearing Epictetus' exhortation to marry, had sarcastically asked the hand of one of his daughters ( Lucian, Demon. 55).
* Philostratus, Epist. 69 ; Lucian, Demon. 55 would not be
inconsistent with the idea of such a visit, but does not
necessarily presuppose it. concomitant of vast scholarship and erudition, but must
have required a deliberate effort directed to the suppression
of the elements of human interest. Epictetus' own allusions to his lameness are non-committal, but of course he would
have been the last person to boast about such things. And
yet, even then, the references to the power of one's master,
or tyrant, to do injury by means of chains, sword, rack,
scourging, prison, exile, crucifixion, and the like (although
the general theme is a kind of Stoic commonplace), are so very numerous as compared with the physical afflictions which come in the course of nature, that it is altogether reasonable to think of his imagination having been profoundly
affected during his impressionable years by a personal
experience of this very sort. X
INTRODUCTION
this connection it should also be observed that his general literary education was not extensive
—
Homer, of course, a little Plato and Xenoplion,
principally for their testimony about Socrates, a few
stock references to tragedy, and the professional's
acquaintance with the philosophy of the later schools,
and this is practically all. It can scarcely be
doubted, as Schenkl observes (p. xci), that this
literary apparatus comes almost entirely from the
extensive collections of Chrysippus. And the same may be said of his aesthetic culture. He seems to have seen and been impressed by the gold-andivory
statues of Zeus and Athena, at Olympia and
Athens respectively, but he set no very high value
upon the work of artists, for he allowed himself once the almost blasphemous characterization of the
Acropolis and its incomparable marbles as "pretty
bits of stone and a pretty rock." Epictetus was
merely moralist and teacher, but yet of such tran- scendent attainments as such that it seems almost
impertinent to expect anything more of him.
The dates of his birth and of his death cannot
be determined with any accuracy. The burning
of the Capitol in a.d. 69 was yet a vivid memory
while he was still a pupil of Musonius ; ^ he enjoyed
the personal acquaintance of Hadrian, but not of
Marcus Aurelius, for all the latter's admiration of
him ; and he speaks freely of himself as an old
man, and is characterized as such by Lucian (Adv.
^ The Capitol was burned in 69 and again in A.D. 80, but
the reference to the event (I. 7, 32) as a crime suggests that
the earlier date should be understood, since the burning
then was due to revolution, while that in a.d 80 was
accidentaL
INTRODUCTION
Indoctum, 13) ; accordingly his life must have covered
roughly the period ca. a.d. 50-120, with which
limits the rare and rather vague references to contemporary events agree. He was, accordingly, an almost exact contemporary of Phitarch and
Tacitus.
Like Socrates and others whouj he admired, he
wrote nothing for publication, ^ and but little memory would have survived of him had not a
faithful pupil, successful as historian and administrator,
Flavius Arrian, recorded many a discourse
and informal conversation. These are saved to us
in four books of Aiarpi/Jai, or Discourses,"^ out of
the original eight, and in a very brief compendium,
the 'Ey;^€ipi8tov,^ a Manual or Handbook, in which,
* Although he must have written much for his own
purposes in elaborating his argumentation by dialectic, since he lauds Socrates for such a practice and speaks of
it as usual for a "philosopher." Besides, in his own discourses he is always looking for an interlocutor, whom he often
finds in the person of pupil or visitor, but, failing these,
he carries on both sides of the debate himself. Cf. Colardeau,
p. 294 f. * Some, especially Schenkl, have believed in the existence
of other collections, and it was long thought that Arrian
had composed a special biography. But the evidence for the other works seems to be based entirely upon those
variations in title and form of reference which ancient methods of citation freely allowed, and it is improbable
that there ever existed any but the works just mentioned. See the special study by R. Asmus, whose conclusions have
been accepted by Zeller, 767, n., and man}' others.
' This has occasionally been translated by Pugio, or Dagger, in early modern editions, possibly with a half- conscious memory of Hebrews iv. 12 : For the icord of God
is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
INTRODUCTION
for the sake of a general public which could not
take time to read the larger ones, the elements
of his doctrine were somewhat mechanically put
together out of verbatim, or practically verbatim,
extracts from the Discourses. That Arrian's rej>ort
is a stenographic ^ record of the ipsissima verba of
the master there can be no doubt. His own
compositions are in Attic, while these works are in the Koine, and there are such marked differences
in style, especially in the use of several of the
prepositions, as Miicke has pointed out, that one
is clearly dealing with another personality. Add
to that the utter difference in spirit and tempo,
and Arrian's inability when writing propria persona
to characterize sharply a personality, while the
conversations of Epictetus are nothing if not vivid. We have, accordingly, in Arrian's Discoiirses a work which, if my knowledge does not fail me,
is really unique in literature, the actual words of an extraordinarily gifted teacher upon scores, not
to say hundreds, of occasions in his own class-room,
conversing with visitors, reproving, exhorting,
encouraging his pupils, enlivening the dullness of
the formal instruction, and, in his own parable,
shooting it through with the red stripe of a
conscious moral purpose in preparation for the
^ Hartmann, p. 252 S., has settled this point.
and intents of the heart. But despite the not inappropriate
character of such a designation, and the fact that Simplicius
himself (preface to his commentary) misunderstood the
application, there can be no doubt but the word ^i^.Kloy
is to be supplied and that the correct meaning is Handbook
or Compendium ; of. Colardeau's discussion, p. 25. xiii
INTRODUCTION
problem of right living.^ The regular class exercises
were clearly reading and interpretation of
characteristic portions of Stoic philosophical works,
somewhat as in an oral examination ; problems in formal logic, these apparently conducted by assistants, or advanced pupils ; and the preparation of themes
or essays on a large scale which required much
writing and allowed an ambitious puj)il to imitate
the style of celebrated authors. The Master supervised
the formal instruction in logic, even though
it might be conducted by others, but there is no
indication that he delivered systematic lectures,
although he clearly made special preparation to
criticize the interpretations of his pupils (I. 10, 8).
From the nature of the comments, which presuppose
a fair elementary training in literature, we can feel sure that only young men and not boys were admitted
to the school, and there are some remarks
which sound very much like introductions to the
general subject of study, while others are pretty
clearly addressed to those who were about to leave —constituting, in fact, an early and somewhat
rudimentary variety of Commencement Address.'^ Some of the pupils were preparing to teach, but the
majority, no doubt, like Arrian, were of high social position and contemplated entering the public service. For a proper understanding of the Discourses it is important to bear in mind their true character,
^ Colardeau, pp. 71-113, has an admirable discussion of the method and technique of instruction employed. In view of the singularly valuable nature of the material it seems strange that more attention has not been paid to Epictetus in the history of ancient education.
' See Halbauer, p. 45 ff., for a good discussion of these points and a critique of the views of Bruns, Colardeau, and
Hartmann.
INTRODUCTION
which Halbauer in a valuable study has most clearly
stated thus (p. 56): "The Diatribae are not the
curriculum proper, nor even a part of that curriculum.
On the contrary, this consisted of readings
from the Stoic writings, while the Diatribae
accompany the formal instruction, dwell on this point or on that, which Epictetus regarded as of
special importance, above all give him an opportunity
for familiar discourse with his pupils, and
for discussing with them in a friendly spirit their
personal affairs." They are not, therefore, a formal
presentation of Stoic philosophy, so that it is unfair to criticize their lack of system and their relative
neglect of logic and physics, upon which the other
Stoics laid such stress, for they were not designed
as formal lectures, and the class exercises had dwelt
satis superqiie, as Epictetus must have felt, upon
the physics and logic, which were after all only
the foundation of conduct, the subject in which
he was primarily interested. They are class-room
comment, in the frank and open spirit which was
characteristic of the man, containing not a little of
what we should now be inclined to restrict to a
private conference, often closely connected, no
doubt, with the readings and themes, but quite as
often, apparently, little more than obiter dicta.^
^ Cf. Bonhoffer, 1S90, 22. The arrangement of topics by
Anian is a point which seems not to have been discussed
as fully as it deserves. Hartuiann's view, that the order
is that of exact chronological sequence, seems to be an
exaggeration of what may be in the main correct, but I think I can trace evidences of a somewhat formal nature in some of the groupings, and it seems not unlikely that a few
of the chapters contain remarks delivered on several oc- casions. However, this is a point which requires an elaborate
investigation and cannot be discussed here. XV
INTRODUCTION
They constitute a remarkable self-revelation of a character of extraordinary strength, elevation, and
sweetness, and despite their frequent repetitions
and occasional obscurity must ever rank high in the
literature of personal portrayal, even were one
inclined to disregard their moral elevation. For
Epictetus was without doubt, as the great wit and
cynic Lucian calls him, "a marvellous old man."
It may not be amiss to dwell a few moments
upon the outstanding features of his personality,
before saying a few words upon his doctrines, for his doctrines, or at all events the varying emphasis
laid on his doctrines, were to a marked degree
influenced by the kind of man that he was. And first of all I should observe that he had
the point of view of a man who had suffered from
slavery and abhorred it, but had not been altogether
able to escape its influence. He was predisposed
to suflfer, to renounce, to yield, and to accept
whatever burden might be laid upon him.^ He
was not a revolutionist, or a cultured gentleman, or a statesman, as were other Stoics before and after. Many of the good things of life which others
enjoyed as a matter of course he had grown accus- tomed never to demand for himself ; and the social obligations for the maintenance and advancement
of order and civilization, towards which men of
higher station were sensitive, clearly did not weigh
heavily upon his conscience. His whole teaching was to make men free and happy by a severe
restriction of efl^ort to the realm of the moral
^ Compare the excellent remarks of E V. Arnold upon
this point, Eneyclop., etc., 324.
INTRODUCTION
nature.^ The celebrated life-formula, di'e'xov koI
aTr€\ov, which one feels inclined to retranslate as " Endure and Renounce," in order to give it once more the definite meaning of which the cliche, " Bear and Forbear," has almost robbed it, is, to speak frankly, with all its wisdom, and humility,
and purificatory power, not a sufficient programme
for a highly organized society making towards an
envisaged goal of general improvement.
And again, in youth he must have been almost
consumed by a passion for freedom. 1 know no man upon whose lips the idea more frequently
occurs. The words " free '' (adjective and verb) and
"freedom" appear some 130 times in Epictetus,
that is, with a relative frequency about six times
that of their occurrence in the New Testament
and twice that of their occurrence in Marcus
Aurelius, to take contemporary works of somewhat
the same general content And with the attainment
of his personal freedom there must have
come such an upwelling of gratitude to God as that which finds expression in the beautiful hvmn
of praise concluding the sixteenth chapter of the
first book, so that, while most Stoics assumed or
at least recognized the possibility of a kind of
immortality, he could wholly dispense with that
desire for the survival of personality after death
which even Marcus Aurelius felt to be almost
necessary for his own austere ideal of happiness.^
* See Zeller's admirable discussion of this topic, p. 776.
* " Sich aber als Menschheit (und nicht nur als In- dividuum) ebenso vergeudet zu fiihlen, wie wir die einzelne
Bliithe von der Natur vergeudet sehen, ist ein Gefiihl iiber
alle Gefuhle. —Wer ist aber desselhen fahig ? " F. Nietzsche
:
MenscMichi s, Allzwiunachliches, I. 51, xvii
INTRODUCTION
Almost as characteristic was his intensity. He
speaks much of tranquillity, as might be expected
of a Stoic, but he was not one of those for whom
that virtue is to be achieved only by Henry James's
formula of successive accumulations of " endless
"
amounts of history, and tradition, and taste. His was a tranquillity, if there really be such a thing,
of moral fervour, and of religious devotion. His
vehemence gave him an extraordinarily firm and
clean-cut character, and made him a singularly
impressive teacher, as Arrian in the introductory
epistle attests. For he was enormously interested
in his teaching, knowing well that in this gift
lay his single talent ; made great efforts to present
his material in the simplest terms and in wellarranged
sequence ; and sharply reproved those who
blamed the stupidity of their pupils for what was due to their own incompetence in instruction. It also gave a notable vigour to his vocabulary and
utterance, his liapprjCTia, or freedom of speech, suo quanique rem nomine oppellare, as Cicero {Ad. Fam.
IX. 22, 1) characterizes that Stoic virtue, which
few exemplified more effectively than Epictetus
;
but it also, it must be confessed, made him some- what intolerant of the opinions of otliers, were they
philosophic or religious, in a fashion which for better or for worse was rapidly gaining ground in his day.^
But he was at the same time extremely modest.
He never calls himself a " philosopher," he speaks
frankly of his own failings, blames himself quite
as much as his pupils for the failure of his instruction
ofttimes to produce its perfect work, and quotes
^ See Bonhoflfer's remarks upon this point (1911, 346). xviii
INTRODUCTION
freely the disrespectful remarks of others about him.
He is severe in the condemnation of the unrepentant
sinner, but charitable towards the naive wrongdoer,
going so far, in fact, in this direction as to advocate principles which would lead to the abolition
of all capital punishment.^ He is much more an
angel of mercy than a messenger of vengeance.
^
And this aspect of his character comes out most
clearly perhaps in his attitude towards children, for with them a man can be more nearly himself than
with his sophisticated associates. No ancient author
speaks as frequently of them, or as sympathetically.
They are one of his favourite parables,^ and though
he is well aware that a child is only an incomplete
man, he likes their straightforwardness in play,
he claps his hands to them and returns their " Merry Saturnalia ! " greeting, yearns to get down
on hands and knees and talk baby talk with them.
There is, of course, a sense in which Pascal's
stricture of Stoic pride applies to Epictetus, for the Stoic virtues were somewhat self-consciously
erected upon the basis of self-respect and self- reliance ; but a more humble and charitable Stoic
it would have been impossible to find, and what
pride there is belongs to the system and not to the man.* Towards God he is always devout,
* I, 18, especially sections 5 ff. « See Colardeau, p. 209 S. , and Zeller, p. 780 f
.
' Cy. Renner's interesting study.
* Pascal's judgment (to say nothing of the grotesque
misconceptions of J. B. Rousseau) was undoubtedly in- fluenced by his preoccupation with the Encheb idion, which,
as necessarily in such a compendium of doctrine, is more
Stoic than Epiotetean, and suppresses many of the more
amiable traits of personality. The actual man of the
INTRODUCTION
grateful, humble, and there is a little trace in him
of that exaltation of self which iu some of the
Stoics tended to accord to the ideal man a moral
elevation that made him sometimes the equal if not
in certain aspects almost the superior of God.^
His doctrines were the conventional ones of
Stoicism, representing rather the teaching of the
early Stoics than that of the middle and later schools, as BonhofFer has elaborately proven. There
is, accordingly, no occasion to dwell at length upon
them, but for the sake of those who may wish
to fit a particular teaching into his general scheme,
a very brief outline may here be attempted.^
Every man bears the exclusive responsibility
himself for his own good or evil, since it is impossible
to imagine a moral order in which one
person does the wrong and another, the innocent,
suffers. Therefore, good and evil can be only those
things which depend entirely upon our moral
purpose, what we generally call, but from the
Stoic's point of view a little inaccurately, our free
* As expressed, e.g., in Seneca, De Prov. VI. 6: Hoe est quo deum antecedalis : ille exira patientiam malorum est, vos supra patientiam. Cf. also Zeller, 257.
^ I am following here in the main, but not uniformly,
Von Arnini's admirable snmmary.
Discourses is a very jnuch more attractive figure than the imaginary reconstruction of the man from the abstracted
principles of the Manual ; there he is a man, here a statue (Martha, 162 f.). It would go hard with many to have
their personal traits deduced from the evidence supplied by
the grammars, indices, or even confessions of faith tliat they have written ; especially hard if the compendium
were drawn up somewhat mechanically by another's band.
XX
INTRODUCTION
will ; they cannot consist in any of those things
which others can do either to us or for us. Man's
highest good lies in the reason, which distinguishes
him from other animals. This reason shows itself in assent or dissent, in desire or aversion, and in
choice or refusal,^ which in turn are based upon
an external impression, c^avTacrta, that is, a prime
datum, a " constant," beyond our power to alter. But we remain free in regard to our attitude
towards them. The use which we make of the
external impressions is our one chief concern, and
upon the right kind of use depends exclusively our happiness. In the realm of judgement the
truth or falsity of the external impression is to be
decided. Here our concern is to assent to the true impression, reject the false, and suspend judgement
regarding the uncertain. This is an act of the
moral purpose, or free will. We should never
forget this responsibility, and never assent to an
external impression without this preliminary testing. In order to escape from being misled by fallacious reasoning in the formation of these judgements we
need instruction in logic, although Epictetus warns
against undue devotion to the subtleties of the
subject.
Corresponding to assent or dissent in the realm
of the intellectual are desire or aversion in the
realm of good and evil, which is the most important
' This triple division of philosophy, with especial but
not exclusive application to ethics, is the only notably
original element which the minute studies of many investi- gators have found in Epictetus, and it is rather a pedagogical
de\'ice for lucid presentation than an innovation in thought. See Bonhoffer, 1890, 22 ff. ; Zeller, p. 769 ; especially
More, p. 107 f.
INTRODUCTION
thing for man, since from failing to attain one's
desire, and from encountering what one would
avoid, come all the passions and sorrows of mankind.
In every desire or aversion there is implicit a value-judgement concerning the good or evil of
the particular thing involved, and these in turn
rest upon general judgements (Soyyuara) regarding
things of value. If we are to make the proper
use of our freedom in the field of desire or aversion
we must have the correct judgements concerning
good and evil. Now the correct judgement is, that
nothing outside the realm of our moral purpose is either good or evil. Nothing, therefore, of that
kind can rightly be the object of desire or aversion,
hence we should restrict the will to the field in which alone it is free, and cannot, therefore, come
to grief. But herein we need not merely tlie correct theoretical conviction, but also continual
practice in application (ao-Kijort?), and it is this which
Epictetus attempts to impart to his pupils, for it
is the foundation of his whole system of education.
Finally, in the field of choice or refusal belongs
the duty ^ (to KaOijKov) of man, his intelligent action
in human and social relations. Externals, which
are neither good nor evil, and so indifferent (riSia-
(f>opa), because not subject to our control, play a
certain role, none the less, as mattei's with wliich
we have to deal, indeed, but should regard no more seriously than players treat the actual ball with which they play, in comparison with the game
itself. It is characteristic of Epictetus that, although
he recognizes this part of Stoic doctrine in which
the theoi'etical indifference of externals is in practice
^ On the use of this term, cf. More, p. 116, 12. xxii
INTRODUCTION
largely abandoned^ he manifests but slight interest
in it. Among duties he is concerned principally with
those of a social character. Nature places us in
certain relations to other persons, and these determine
our obligations to parents, brothers, children,
kinsmen, friends, fellow-citizens, and mankind in general. We ought to have the sense of fellowship
and partnership (koivwiikoi), that is, in thought and
in action we ought to remember the social organization
in which we have been placed by the divine
order. The shortcomings of our fellow-men are to be met with patience and charity, and we should
not allow ourselves to grow indignant over them, for they too are a necessary element in the universal plan.
The religious possibilities of Stoicism are developed
further by Epictetus than by any other
representative of the school. The conviction that
the universe is wholly governed by an all-wise,
divine Providence is for him one of the principal
supports of the doctrine of values. All things, even apparent evils, are the will of God, comprehended
in his universal plan, and therefore good
from the point of view of the whole. It is our moral duty to elevate ourselves to this conception,
to see things as God sees them. The man who
reconciles his will to the will of God, and so recognizes that every event is necessary and reasonable
for the best interest of the whole, feels no
discontent with anything outside the control of
his free will. His happiness he finds in filling the
role which God has assigned him, l)ecoming thereby
a voluntary co-worker with God, and in filling this role no man can hinder him.
xxiii
INTRODUCTION
Religion as reconciliation to the inevitable
—
eKovra
Six^a-OaL TO. avayKala (ft*g. 8), in gratiam cum falo
revertere ^—is almost perfectly exemplified in Epictetus,
for with him philosophy has definitely turned
religion, and his instruction has become less secular
than clerical. 2 But it is astonishing to what heights
of sincere devotion, of intimate communion, he
attained, though starting with the monistic preconceptions
of his school, for the very God who
took, as he felt, such personal interest in him, was
after all but " a subtle form of matter pervading
the grosser physical elements . . . this Providence
only another name for a mechanical law of ex- pansion and contraction, absolutely predetermined
in its everlasting recurrences." ^ Of his theology one can scarcely speak. His personal needs and
his acquiescence with tradition led him to make
of his God more than the materials of his philosophical
tenets could allow. The result is for our modern thinking an almost incredible mixture of
Theism, Pantheism, and Polytheism, and it is impossible,
out of detached expressions, to construct
a consistent system. As a matter of fact, with a naive faith in God as a kind of personification of
the soul's desire, he seems to have cherished
simultaneously all of these mutually exclusive views
of his nature. His moral end was eudaemonism,
^ Seneca, Ep. 91, 15. " Dass der Mensch ins Unvermeidliche
sich fiige, darauf dringen alle Religionen ; jede sucht
auf ihre Weise mit dieser Aufgabe fertig zu warden."
—
Goethe.
* Cf. Lagrange, p. 211. —" The school of the philosophers
is a hospital " (cf. Epict. TIL 23, 30).
• More, p. 167, and cf, the whole brilliant passage,
p. 162 £
INTRODUCTION
to which, in a singularly frank expression (I. 4, 27),
he was ready to sacrifice even truth itself. No
wonder, then, he cared little for logic as such and
not at all for science.^ " The moralist assumes
that what lies upon his heart as an essential need,
must also be the essence and heart of reality. . . . In looking at everything from the point of view
of happiness men bound the arteries of scientific research." Though spoken of the Socratic schools
in general, this word of Nietzsche's - seems especially
apt of Epictetus. He was of an age when
the search for happiness by the process of consulting
merely the instincts of the heart was leading
rapidly to an alienation from scientific truth and
a prodigious decline in richness of cultural experience.
Yet even in his happiness, which we cannot dismiss
as a mere pose, there was something wanting. The
existence of evil was in one breath denied, and in
another presumed by the elaborate preparations that one must make to withstand it. " And having done
all, to stand ? " No, even after having done all, " the
house might get too full of smoke," the hardships of
life too great any longer to endure ; the ominous
phrase, " the door is open," or its equivalent, the final recourse of suicide, recurs at intervals through his
pages like a tolling bell. And beyond ? Nothing.
Nothing to fear indeed ; " the dewdrop sinks into the
shining sea." " When He provides the necessities no longer. He sounds the recall ; He opens the door
and says, ' Go.' Where ? To nothing you need
fear, but back to that from which you came, to what
1 Cf. Zeller. p. 770.
• Menschliches, Alhumensehliches, I. 21 ; 23.
INTRODUCTION
is friendly and akin to you, to the physical elements"
(III. 13, 14). But at the same time there is nothing
to hope for.^ That Epictetus was influenced by the writings of
the New Testament has often been suggested.
There were those in late antiquity who asserted
it,^ and it was natural enough in an age when
Tertullian and Jerome believed that Seneca had
conversed with Paul, and in Musonius Rufus, the
teacher of Epictetus, Justin (II. 8) recognizes a kindred spirit. But despite the recrudescence of
the idea from time to time, and the existence of a few scholars in our own generation who seem yet
to believe it, this question can be regarded as
definitely settled by the elaborate researches of
BonhofFer (1911). Of course Epictetus knew about
the existence of Christians, to whom he twice refers,
calling them once Jews (II. 9, 19 fF.), and a second
time Galilaeans (IV. 7, 6), for there was an early
community at Nicopolis (Paul's Epistle to Titus, iii. 12), but he shared clearly in the vulgar prejudices
against them, and his general intolerance of variant
opinion, even when for conscience' sake, makes it certain that he would never have bothered to read
their literature. The linguistic resemblances, which
are occasionally striking, like " Lord, have mercy ! "
Kvpu, iXerjacv, are only accidental, because Epictetus was speaking the common language of ethical
exhortation in which the evangelists and apostles
wrote ; while the few specious similarities are counterbalanced by as many sti'iking differences
In the field of doctrine, the one notable point of
1 See More, p. 168 ff. * A Byzantine scholiast in Schenkl* rv. xxvi
I
INTRODUCTION
disregard for the things of this world ^ is offset by
so many fundamental differences in presupposition,
if not in common ethical practice, that any kind
of a sympathetic understanding of the new religion on the part of Epictetus is inconceivable. A certain
ground-tone of religious capability, a fading of
interest in the conventional fields of human achievement,
a personal kindliness and " harmlessness " of
character, a truly pathetic longing as of tired men
for a passive kind of happiness, an ill-defined
yearning to be " saved " by some spectacular and
divine intervention, these things are all to be found
in the Discourses, yet they are not there as an
effect of Christian teaching, but as a true reflection of the tone and temper of those social circles to which the Gospel made its powerful appeal.
^
His influence has been extensive and has not
yet waned. Hadrian was his friend, and, in the
next generation, Marcus Aurelius was his ardent
disciple. Celsus, Gellius, and Lucian lauded him,
and Galen wrote a special treatise in his defence.
His merits were recognized by Christians like
Chrysostom, Gregory of Nazianzus, and Augustine,
while Origen rated him in some respects even
* " I find in Epictetus," says Pascal, "an incomparable
art to disturb the repose of those who seek it in things
external, and to force them to recognize that it is impossible
for them to find anything but the error and the suffering
which they are seeking to escape, if they do not give
themselves without reserve to God alone."
* "For it is doubtful if there was ever a Christian of the early Church," remarks von Wilaraowitz (KuUur der
Gegenicarfi, I. 8, 244), " who came as close to the real teaching
of Jesus as it stands in the synoptic gospels as did this Phrygian."
xxvii
INTRODUCTION
above Plato. His Manual, with a few simple
changes, principally in the proper names, was
adapted by two diftierent Christian ascetics as a rule
and guide of monastic life.^ In modern times his vogue started rather slowly
with translations by Perotti and Politian, but ver- nacular versions began to appear in the sixteenth
century, and at the end of that century and the
first part of the subsequent one, Epictetus was one
of the most powerful forces in the movement of
Neo-Stoicism, especially under the protagonists
Justus Lipsius and Bishop Guillaume Du Vair.2 His
woi'k and the essays of Montaigne were the principal
secular readings of Pascal, and it was with Epictetus
and his disciple Marcus Aurelius that the Earl
of Shaftesbury "was most thoroughly conversant." ^ Men as different as Touissant L'Ouverture and
Landor, Frederick the Great and Leopardi, have
been among his admirers. The number of editions
and new printings of his works, or of portions or translations of the same, averages considerably more than one for each year since the invention
of printing. In the twentieth century, through
the inclusion of Crossley's Golden Sayings of
Epictetus in Charles William Eliot's Harvard Seyies
of Classics, and of the Maitual in Carl Hilty's Gliick,
of which two works upwards of three hundred and
^ The same was done again in the seventeenth century for the Carthusians by Matthias Mittner (1632), who took the
first .35 of his 50 precepts Ad conservandam animi pacem
from the Encheiridion. See Acta Erudit. 1726, 264.
' See Zanta's elaborate work upon the share taken by
these men in the movement.
' B. Rand : The Life, etc., of Anthony, Earl of Shaftesbury
(author of the Characteristics), (1900), p. xi. xxviii
INTRODUCTION
fifty thousand copies had, at a recent date, been
sold, it may safely be asserted that more copies
of portions of his work have been printed in the last two decades than ever existed all told from his own
day down to that time.
In concluding one can hardly refrain from translating
a portion of the sincere and stirring passage
in which Justus Lipsius, a great man and a dis- tinguished scholar, paid Epictetus the tribute of his homage
:
" So much for Seneca ; another brilliant star
arises, Epictetus, his second in time, but not in merit ; comparable with him in the weight, if not
in the bulk, of his writings ; superior in his life. He was a man who relied wholly upon himself
and God, but not on Fortune. In origin low and
servile, in body lame and feeble, in mind most
exalted, and brilliant among the lights of every
age
" But few of his works remain : the Encheiridion,
assuredly a noble piece, and as it were the soul
of Stoic moral philosophy ; besides that, the Discourses,
which he delivered on the streets, in his house, and in the school, collected and arranged
by Arrian. Nor are these all extant. . . . But, so help me God, what a keen and lofty spirit in them I a soul aflame, and burning with love of the
honourable ! There is nothing in Greek their like,
unless I am mistaken ; I mean with such notable
vigour and fire. A novice or one unacquainted with
true philosophy he will hardly stir or affect, but
when a man has made some progress or is already
far advanced, it is amazing how Epictetus stirs him
up, and though he is always touching some tender
INTRODUCTION
spot, yet he gives delight also. . . . There is no one who better influences and shapes a good mind. I never read that old man without a stirring of my
soul within me, and, as with Homer, 1 think the more of him each time I re-read him, for he seems
always new ; and even after I hai^e returned to him I feel that I ought to return to him yet once
more.''
XXX
BIBLIOGRAPHY!
The editio princeps of Epictetus was prepared by
Victor Trincavelli at Venice, in 1535, from a singularly
faulty MS., so that it is valueless for the
purposes of textual criticism. The first substantial
work of a critical character was done by Jacob
Schegk, a distinguished professor of medicine at Tubingen, in the edition of Basel, 1554. Although
few changes were made in the Greek text, Schegk
employed his admirable Latin version as a medium
for the correction of hundreds of passages. Even
greater were the services of Hieronymus Wolf,
whose edition, with translation and commentary,
Basel, 1560, is perhaps the most important landmark
in Epictetean studies, but for some reason failed to influence markedly the common tradition, which
long thereafter continued to reproduce the inferior
Greek text of Schegk (Trincavelli).
The next advance is connected with the name of
John Upton, whose work appeared in parts, London,
1739-41. Upton had some knowledge of a number
of MSS., and in particular a " codex," which was a copy of the Trincavelli edition that contained in the
margins numerous readings of a MS. now in Mutina,
and possibly other MSS., together with notes and
emendations from Wolf, Salmasius, and others, so that one cannot be certain always just what
"authority" is behind any particular reading whose
* For details see my forthcoming Contributions toward a
Bibliography of EpicUtus.
xxxi
OL. I. B
BIBLIOGRAPHY
source is otherwise not accounted for. He had,
moreover, the annotations of Anthony, Earl of
Shaftesbury, and the assistance of the learned James
Harris, and his contributions to the interpretation of
Epictetus in the elaborate commentary are numerous.
Richard Bentley's sagacious and often brilliant emendations entered in the margins of his copy of
the Trincavelli edition remained unfortunately un- known until quite recently, as also the ingenious
and stimulating, but on the whole less carefully
considered, annotations of J. J. Reiske (in H.
Schenkl's edition).
Appropriately designated Monumeiila (Epideteae
Philosophiae Monumenta) is the great work in five large volumes by Johannes Schweighauser, Leipzig,
1799-1800, immediately following a notable edition,
in fact the only really critical edition, of the Encheiridion
(1798), which, despite its imperfections, subsequent
editors have been content merely to reprint.
Schweighauser's work is characterized by acumen,
industry, and lucidity, and it will be long before it is entirely superseded. The edition by A. Koraes,
Paris, 1826, although its authpr was a learned and
ingenious scholar, is marred by a number of unnecessary
rewritings.
A substantial critical edition we owe to the painstaking
labours of Heinrich Schenkl (Leipzig, 1894;
editio minor, 1898; second edition, 1916). This is based upon the Bodleian MS. Misc. Graec. 251, s. xi/xii, which Schenkl and, it would appear, J. L. G.
Mowat before him [Joum. of. Philol. 1877, 60fF. ; cf. J. B. Mayor, CI. Rei\ 1895, 31 f, and Schenkl, ^c?. minor, 1898, p. iv ; ed. 1916, p. iv) have shown to be
the archetype of all the numerous existing MSS. of
xxxii
BIBLIOGRAPHY
the Discourses.^ For the ediiio mhior (1898) a new
collation was prepared by the skilled hand of W. M.
Lindsay, and for the second edition (1916) Schenkl
himself had photographs of the complete MS. to work with, while T. W. Allen furnished an expert's
transcription of the Scholia, with the result that,
although the first edition by Schenkl left something
to be desired in the accuracy and fullness of its MS.
readings, one can approach the apparatus criticus of
the second edition with all reasonable confidence.
Schenkl's own contributions to the constitution of
the text by way of emendation are considerable, the
number of emendations, however, wisely somewhat
reduced in the latest printing. A very full index
verbonim greatly facilitates studies of all kinds.
Of the Encheiridion scores of editions have
appeared, but hardly any that deserve mention
either for critical or exegetical value, except those
that form parts of the above-mentioned editions by
Wolf, Upton, and Schweighauser (a better text in
his separate edition of the Encheiridion, Leipzig,
1798). But a few necessary remarks about that
work and the Fragrnents will be given in the introduction
to the second volume of the present work.
A brief list of some of the most important titles bearing upon the criticism of Epictetus : —
H. von Amim, article " Epiktetos," in Pauly's
Realencyclop'ddie, etc., Zweite Bearbeitung, \l.
* For some account of a large numl)er of these, see Schenkl *, LV—LVIII. Theif value is very slight indeed, and only for purposes of emendation, since as yet there seem to exist no
authentic traces of the existence of a second early MS. of Epictetus, so that the Discourses must have survived the Middle Ages in only a single exemplar.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
126-31. Contains an excellent summary of his teaching. E. V. Arnold, Roman Stoicism. Cambridge, 1911.
Article " Epictetus," in Hastings, Efic. of Rel. VI, 323 f. R. Asmus, Quaestiones Epicteteae. Freiburg i. B. 1888.
R. Bentley's critical notes on Arrian's " Discourses
of Epictetus "
; Trans. Amer. Philol. Assoc. 1921,
53, 40-52 (by W. A. Oldfather).
A. Bonhofter, Epiktet und die Stoa. Stuttgart, 1890. Die Ethik des Stoikers Epiktet. Stuttgart, 1894.
Epiktet und das Neue Testament. Giessen, 1911.
"Epiktet und das Neue Testament," Zeitschr. fur
die neutesi. JViss. 1912, 13, 281-92. These are incomparably the most important critical works on the subjects which they cover, and on many
points have reached definitive conclusions.
R. Bultmann, Der Stil der paulinischen Predlgt und die hpiisch-stoische Diatribe. Marburg, 1910. "Das
religiose Moment in der ethischen Unterweisung
des Epiktets und das Neue Testament," Zeitschr. filr die neatest. Wiss. 1912, 13, 97 ff., 177 ff. Th. Colardeau, Etude sur Epictete. Paris, 1903.
F. W. Farrar, Seekers after God. London, 1863, and
often reprinted.
H. Gomperz, Die Lehensauffassung der griechischen
Philosophen und das Ideal der iniieren Freiheit. Jena, 1904. P. 186, and especially 195 ff. 2nd
ed. 1915.
O. Halbauer, De diatribis Epicteti. Leipzig, 1911. K. Hartmann, " Arrian und Epiktat," Neue Jahrb.
1905, 15, 248-75.
E. Hatch, The Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages
upoji the Christian Church. Sixth ed., London,
1897.
xxxiv
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Fr. M. J. Lagrange, "La philosophie religieuse d'Epict^te,
etc." Revue Biblique, 1912, 91 ff. ; 192 ff. W. S. Landor, Imaginary Conversations of Greeks and
Romans. London, 1853, and often reprinted. " Epictetus and Seneca."
J. L.ipsius, Manuduclio ad Sioicam pkilosopkiam. I. xix,
pp. 62-64. ed. Antwerp, 1604. Vol. IV, p. 681 f., ed. Wesel, 1625.
C. Martha, Les moralistes sous Cempire romain, philosophes
et poeies. Paris, 1865, and often re- printed.
J. B. Mayor, Rev. of H. Schenkl's " Epictetus," Class. Rev., 1895, 9, 31-7.
P. E. H. Melcher, " De sermone Epicteteo quibus
, rebus ab Attica regula discedat," Diss, philol.
Hallaises, 17, 1905. G. Misch, Geschichte der Autobiographic. Leipzig and
Berlin, 1907. Pp. 257-65.
P. E. More, Hellenistic Philosophies. Princeton, 1923.
Epictetus, pp. 94-171.
R. Miicke, Zu Arrians und Epiktels Sprachgebrauch.
Nordhausen, 1887.
B. Pascal, Entretien aiec de Sad sur £picteie et Montaigne.
First published in authentic form in M.
Havet : Pensees de Pascal, Paris, 1852, and fre- quently since that time. For discussions of
Pascal's very interesting views see especially
M. J. Guyau : Pascal, etc., Paris, 1875 C. A.
Saint-Beuve : Port Royal, fifth edition. Paris,
1888 ff., Vol. II. pp. 381 ff. F. Strowski : Histoire
du sentiment religieux en France nu xvm siide,
fourth edition. Paris, 1909.
R. Renner. Zu Epiktets Diatriben. Amberg, 1904. Das Kind. Ein Gleichnismiittl aes Epiktets
Miinchen, 1905. zxxv
BIBLIOGRAPHY
D. S. Sharp, Epictetus and the New Testament. London,
19U.
Rt. Rev. J. L. Spalding, Glimpses of Truth, with
essays on Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius.
Chicago, 1903. Third edition, 1913.
L. Stein, Die Psychologie der Stoa. Berlin, 1886,
1888.
J. Stuhrmann, De vocahulis notionum philosophicarum
in Epicteti libris. Neustadt, 1885.
K. Vorlander, " Christliche Gedanken eines heidnischen
Philosophen," Preuss. Jahrb., 1897,
pp. 89, 193-222.
Louis Weber, " La morale d'Epict^te et les besoins
presents de I'enseignement moral," Rev. de
Melaph. et de Moral, six articles, 1905-1909.
U. von Wilamowitz-MoUendorfF, "Die griechische
Literatur des Altertums," in Kultur der
Gegenwart^, I. 8 (Leipzig and Berlin, 1912), 244. Compare also the admirable statement in his Grieckisches Lesebuch, I. (Berlin, 1902), pp. 230-1.
Th. Zahn, Der Stoiker Epiktet und sein Verh'dltnis sum
Christentum. Erlangen, 1894. Second edition,
Leipzig, 1895. The thesis, that Epictetus was
acquainted with the New Testament, has been
very generally rejected, but the address has
value apart from that contention,
L. Zanta, La renaissance du stoicisme au xvi' siecle. Paris, 1914. La traduction frangaise du Manuel
d'Epictete d' Andre de Rivaudeau, etc. Paris,
1914. E. Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen*, III. 1 (Leipzig, 1909), 765-81 ; III. 2 (1902), 910-14.
There have been three notable translations into
xxxvi
BIBLIOGRAPHY
English of Epictetus ; a vigorous and idiomatic reproduction
by Elizabeth Carter (1758, and often thereafter),
a learned and exact rendition by George Long
(1877, and frequently reproduced), and a most fluent
and graceful version by P. E. Matheson (1916). To
all of these, but especially to the last mentioned, I have been indebted upon occasion.
SYMBOLS
S= Cod. Bodleianus Misc. Graec. 251, s. xi/xii. Sa, Sb, Sc, Sd = corrections of different periods, as discriminated by Schenkl,
s = one or more copies of S. In general only the important deviations from 5
have been recorded in the apparatus criticus. All
substantial emendations, when made by modern
scholars, are recorded, but the obvious corrections
made by Greek scholars themselves, either on S
itself or in its numerous copies, have generally been
passed over in silence, since the number of these is so large (for S is full of errors of all kinds) that they
would seriously clutter up the page without adding
anything important to our knowledge. For details
of the MS. tradition the reader is referred to the
elaborate apparatus in Schenkl's second ed. (Leipzig,
1916), upon which the present text is dependent,
although I have not hesitated to depart from his reading or his punctuation in a number of passages.
W. A. OLDFATHER.
Urhana, Illinois. March 6, 1925.
XXXVUl
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES
OF EPICTETUS
APPIANOY
TON EniKTHTOY AIATPIB12N
AB r A^
A
KE*AAAIA TOT A BIBAIOT
a'. Tlepl Tuv i<p'' rifiiv Kal ovk i<p' ^julv. 0. l\S>s 6.V ris cr^^oi rb Kark irp6<runrov iv iravrl;
y'. riaJs &.y rts airh tov rhv 6ehi' irarepa fJyai rSiv avdpwirwv inl
TO. «{i)j iirixdol;
5'. riepl irpoKoirr)S.
('. Tlphs rovs 'AKaSri/j.atKo6s'
^'. Tlfpl irpovolas. f. Tlepl Tris xp*'oy tmi' fi.iTaTmcT6vToiv Koi virodeTiKwv Kcd twv
&fj.olcov.
ri'. "On ai Svvdfxfis rots avav^ivTOis ovk a.cr<pa\t'is.
6". His airh rov (Tvyyevfis T)fx.as dyat T(f de^ tir(K6oL &y tis iiti TO, e|»?J;
«'. Tlphs Tovs irepl tccs fv 'T?<*>/^ti wpoayaiyas icrirouSaKOras.
ta'. Tlepl <pL\offTopyias.
iB'. Tlepl eiiaptarriaeas.
ly'. Xlws eKaara eaTi iroietv kpecrrSis Otois
;
i5'. "Otj TrdfTas e<popa rh Oeiov.
^ The whole title supplied by Schenkl.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES
OF EPICTETUS
IN FOUR BOOKS
BOOK I
Chapters of- the First Booh
I. Of the things which are under our control and
not under our control.
II. How may a man preserve his proper character upon every occasion ? III. From the thesis that God is the Father of mankind,
how may one proceed to the consequences ? IV. Of progress. V. Against the Academics. VI. Of providence. VII. Of the use of equivocal premisses, hypothetical
arguments, and the like. Vni. That the reasoning faculties, in the case of the uneducated, are not free from error. IX. How from the thesis that we are akin to God may
one proceed to the consequence ? X. To those who have set their hearts upon preferment
at Rome.
XI. Of family affection. Xll. Of contentment.
XIII. How may each several thing be done acceptably
to the gods ? XIV. That the Deity oversees all men.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
i« . Ti iirayyeWfTai (l>t\ocro(pla
;
»f . Tlepl TTpovoias. i\. "Ort avayKala to \oyiK<L
ill • On oil Se? x«^*''''ai'i'f iv to7s hfiapravofxivois.
to. ni$ ex*"' ^^^ TTphs Tvvs Tvpivvous
;
K . Tlepl Tov \oyov ircus avTov 6fo>pr]TiK6s iariv.
ita . Tlfihs Toiis Bavfid^fcrdai dtKovras.
k/3'. Tlep\ rStv vpo\ii\peaiy.
Ky'. Ylijhs 'EirlKovpov.
/c8'. Tlws rphs T^j KfpKTrdffeis aywviffr iov
;
Kt'. Tlphs rh avri.
K^'. TlS 6 fillDTlKhs l'6/J.OS ; K^'. riocraxtis ««' tpavraaicu yivovrai koL rlva rpSxfpa irphs avras ^or]di)ti.aTa irapaaKevacrriov
;
Kif. 'On ov Se? x*^*'''^^''*"' iyBp'-uTTois Koi riva ra fiiKpa, koL (liyaKa iv avdpwirois.
kO'. Tlfpl evaraOeias. \ . TI 5«r wpSx^^pov ^x*"* ^'' "^"^^^ •KfpKni.atffiv ; ^Appiavo<i AovKLtp TeWio) j^aipeiv
1 Ovre (Tvveypa-^a iyco tov? ^^TTiKTrjTov \6'yov<i
ovTwf: OTTCi)? dv Tt? (Tvyypdyfreie ra roiavra ovre
i^ijvejKa et? avOpcoTrovi auT6<;, 09 76 oi/Se avy2
ypd^lral (f)r]p,L. oaa Be tfKOvov avrov \eyovro<i,
ravra avra iireipddrjv avTolq ovop-acriv to? olov re r]v ypayfrdfj,€vo<; vTrop.vrip.ara et? vcrrepov
ep,avrq) Sia(f)vXd^ai tt;? exeivov hiavoia<i koI
3 'irappT]aia(;. ecrri 8t] roiavra axnrep et/co? orrola
dv Ti? avToOev opprjOel^; eXiroi rrpo^ erepov, ov^
OTTola dv itrl ra> varepov evrvy^dveiv rtvd<; 4 avroLf avyypd^oi. roiavra S' ovra ovk olSa
07ra)9 ovre e^oi/ro? ep,ov ovre elBoro^ e^errecrev el<i
^ The contrast intended is between ypa.<pai, " write," § 2, and (TvyypdcpoD, "compose." Arrian had in jnind, no doubt,
the works of Plato and Xenophon, which, although they pur- ported to reproduce the words of Socrates, were in fact highly finished literary conripositions.
4
BOOK 1 XV.
XVL
xvn.
xviu.
XIX.
XX.
XXI.
XXII.
XXIII.
XXIV.
XXV.
XXVI.
XXVII.
XXVUI.
XXIX.
XXX.
What does philosophy profess ? Of pro\'idence.
That the art of reasoning is indispensable.
That we ought not to be angry with the erring.
How ought we to bear ourselves towards tyrants?
How does the reasoning faculty contemplate
itself ? To those who would be admired.
Of preconceptions. In answer to Epicurus.
How should we struggle against difficulties ? Upon the same theme.
What is the rule of life ? In how many ways do the external impressions
arise, and what aids should we have ready at hand to meet them?
That we ought not to be angry with men ; and
what are the little things and the great among
men?
Of steadfastness. What aid ought we have at hand in difficulties ?
Arrian to Lucius Gellius, greeting
:
I HAVE not composed these Words of Epictetus as one might be said to "com{X)se" books of this kind, nor have 1 of my own act published them to the world ; indeed, I acknowledge that I have not " composed " them at all.^ But whatever I heard
him say I used to write down, word for word, as best I could, endeavouring to preserve it as a memorial, for my own future use, of his way of
thinking and the frankness of his speech. They are, accordingly, as you might expect, such remarks as one man might make off-hand to another, not such as he
would compose for men to read in after time. This
being their character, they have fallen, I know not
how, without my will or knowledge, into the hands
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
5 avdpddirovs- aXX' ifioi ye ov ttoXi)? X0709, el ovx
iKavo'i (f}avov/jLaL avyypd^eiv, 'E7rf«T7^Tft) re ov8'
0X170?, el KaTa(j)poi'ijaet Ti? avrov TOiv \6yo)v,
iirel Kal Xeycov avrov^ ov8€v6<; dXXov Srfko^; rjv
ecfyte/ievo^; on firj Kivrjcrai ra? yvcofxa^ t6)V ukov6
ovTcov TTpo? ra ^eXria-ra. el /xev 8r} rovro ye
avTO BiaTrpciTTOivTO 01 Xoyoi ovroi, €')(^oc€v av
olfiai onrep )(^pr} e^eiv tov<; rS)v (f)iXo(T6(f)o)v X6yov<;'
7 el 8e fxi], aXX' exeivo larcoaav ol evrvy)(^dvovTe^
on, aino<i ottotc eXeyev ainovii, dvdyfcr) rjv tovto
'iTd(T^(eiv Tov aKpowjievov avTcov oirep exelvo^
8 avTov iradelv rj^ovXeTO. el S' oi Xoyoi avroX e^'
avTcov TOVTO ov ScaTrpaTTOVTai, tv)(ov ^ev eya)
atTto9, TVXov Se xal dvdy/C7] ovto)<; ex^tv. eppwao.
a . Yiepl Tbiv i(f)^ tj/jlIv kuI ouk e0' i]/j.tv Tatv dXXcov hwdfiewv ovBefiiav evprjcreTe avTrjv
avTrj^ 0eQ)p7]TiK7]v, ov Toivvv ovSe BoKi/j.acrTiKrjv
rj aTToSoKifiaaTiK-qv. tj ypa/JifiaTiKr) fieXPi' TLVO<i KeKTT]Tai TO dewprjTiKov ; P'expt tov Biayvcovai
TO. ypdfj,/j,aTa. rj fjLovcriKT] ; f^expt tov hiayvwvai
TO /neXo<i. avTT) ovv ai/Trjv dempel Ti<i avTwv ; ovBa/jL(o^. dXX' 6t€ fiev, dv rt ypd<pr]<i tw eTatpw,
Set TovTwv T&v ypaiTTecoi', rj ypafi/xaTiKT] eper
TToTepov 8e ypaiTTeov tw eTaipw rj ov ypuTTTeov,
7) ypafifxaTiKri ovk epel. Kai irept T6i)v fieX&v
* Sui'dueis includes arts as well as faculties, and both are
dealt with in this context.
BOCK I. I. 1-3
of men. Yet to me it is a matter of small concern
if I shall be thought incapable of "composing" a work, and to Epictetus of no concern at all if anyone
shall despise his words, seeing that even when he
uttered them he was clearly aiming at nothing else but to incite the minds of his hearers to the best
things. If, now, these words of his should produce
that same effect, they would have, I think, just that
success which the words of the philosophers ought
to have ; but if not, let those who read them be
assured of this, that when Epictetus himself spoke
them, the hearer could not help but feel exactly
what Epictetus wanted him to feel. If, however,
the words by themselves do not produce this effect,
perhaps I am at fault, or else, perhaps, it cannot
well be otherwise. Farewell.
CHAPTER I Of the things which are tinder our control and not under our control Among the arts and faculties ^ in general you will
find none that is self-contemplative, and therefore none that is either self-approving or self-disapproving.
How far does the art of grammar possess the power
of contemplation } Only so far as to pass judgement
upon what is written. How far the art of music t Only so far as to pass judgement upon the melody.
Does either of them, then, contemplate itself.' Not
at all. But if you are writing to a friend and are at
a loss as to what to write, the art of grammar will
tell you ; yet whether or no you are to write to your
friend at all, the art of grammar will not tell. The
7
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ftxrauTft)? r) fiovaiKT]' irorepov K aareov vvv Kal
Kidapiareov rj ovre aareov ovtc Kidaptcrreov ovk
4 ipei. ri<i ovv ipel ; rj koX avrrjv decopovcra kuI
raWa iravra. avrr) 5' earl rt? ; rj Svvafii^ rj XoyiKi]' pbovrj yap avri] koI avrrjv KaravoTjaovaa
irapeiXriTTrai, Tt9 re ccrrt koI tL hvvarat, koI
TToaov d^Ca ovcra iXijXvdev, koX Ta<; dXXa<; dird6
(7a?. Tt yap icrriv aXXo ro Xeyov on ;)^/3ua-toz/ KaXov ecTtv ; avro ydp ov Xeyei. hrfXov on r/ 6 ^prjariKj] 8vva/jii<i Tal<: (pavTa(TLat<;. n aXXo
TO fjLova-iKijp, ypafip,aTtK7]v, to,^ dXXa<i hvvdpsv^
BtaKplvov, hoKip^d^ov Tfi? ')(^prjcrei<i axnwv /cal tov<;
KUipov^ TrapaSetKvvov ; ovhev dXXo.
7 "VlcnTep ovv rjv d^cov, to Kpdnarov aTrdvTwv
Koi Kvpievov ol 6eol povov e'^' 'qplv eiroi'qa-av, rrjv
yprjdLV rrjv opBrjv rat? ^avTaaiai'i, ra o aXXa
8 OVK e<^' 'qplv. dpd ye on ovk ijdeXov ; iyoo pev
hoK'j) on, el rjhvvavro, KuKeiva av rjplv eVe9
rpeyp-av dXXd Trdvrax; ovk r]8vvavT0. eiri, yrj<i ydp ovTWi Kal crcopan avvSeSepevov<; rotovrq) Kai
KOivo)voi<; ToiovToa TTw? olov T Tjv et<? ravra vtto TO)v eKTO^ p.r] epiTohvi^ecrOai
;
10 'AX,Xa Ti Xeyei 6 Zeu? ; "'ETrtKTrjTe, el olov re 771^, Kal rb awpdnov dv aov Kal to KTrjatoiov
11 eiroirjaa eXevOepov Kal dTrapavoSccrTov. vvv oe,
BOOK I. I. 3-1
1
same holds true of the art of music with regard to melodies ; but whether you are at this moment to sing and play on the lyre, or neither sing nor play,
it will not tell. What art or faculty, then, will tell?
That one which contemplates both itself and everything
else. And what is this ? The reasoning
faculty ; for this is the only one we have inherited
which will take knowledge both of itself—what it is, and of what it is capable, and how valuable a gift it
is to us—and likewise of all the other faculties. For what else is it that tells us gold is beautiful ? For
the gold itself does not tell us. Clearly it is the
faculty which makes use of external impressions.
What else judges with discernment the art of music,
the art of grammar, the other arts and faculties,
passing judgement upon their uses and pointing out
the seasonable occasions for their use ? Nothing
else does.
As was fitting, therefore, the gods have put under
our control only the most excellent faculty of all and that which dominates the rest, namely, the
power to make correct use of external impressions,
but all the others they have not put under our
control. Was it indeed because they would not?
I for one think that had they been able they would
have entrusted us with the others also ; but they were quite unable to do that. For since we are upon earth and trammelled by an earthy body and
by earthy associates, how was it possible that, in
respect of them, we should not be hampered by
external things?
But what says Zeus ? " Epictetus, had it been
possible I should have made both this paltry body
and this small estate of thine free and unhampered.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
fxri ere XavOaverw, tovto ovk ecrriv aov, a>Cka
12 7r77\o9 Ko/j,\p-(o<i Tre(f)vpafi€vo<;. eirel Se tovto ovk
r^hvvdfxrjv eScoKa/miv aot fiepo^; ti tjfieTepov, ttjv
hvvajjiiv TavTTjv tt)v oppLrjTLK-qv re koX d(f)opp.r]TlKrjV
Koi OpeKTLKrjV T€ Kai €KKXlTlKr)P Kal
clttXco^ TTjv ')(^pri(Tr iKYjv Tat<i (fiavTaatai^, ly? CTrt- fX€\ov/j.€vo<i Kal iv fi TO, cravTov Ti0efi€vo<} ovhiiroTe
KtoXvOrjcrr), ovheiroT efnroBtadj](TT], ov CTevd^ei^,
13 ov fjbifxyfrrj, ov Ko\aK€va€i<i ovSeva. tL ovv ; firj Ti fiiKpd (Toi (^aiveTai Taina ;^ "
H-V J^voito.^^ " dpKj) ovv avToU ; " "eu;^o/iat he T0i<i 6^eot9." 14 Nvv 8' ero? 8vvdfj,€voi eiripsXelcrdai koX kvX TrpocrrjpTrjKevai eavTov^ fidWov OeXofiev ttoXXwv
iirifxeXeladai koX ttoXXoI^ TrpoaheheaOai koI tw
adifxaTi Kal ttj KTija-ei Kal d8eX(f)q) Kal (piXw Kal
15 TCKvo) Kal BovXo). aTe ovv ttoXXoi^ TrpoaBeSep,evoi
^apovfieda vir avTOiV Kal KaOeXKOfieOa.
16 hid TOVTO, dv aTrXoia p, Kadrjfieda cnrd)p,€voi, Kal
irapaKinrTO/jiev o-fi/e%w?* " rt? dvefw<; Trvel ;"
fiopea<i. " tL r^fiiv Kal avT& ; Trore o ^e(f>vpo<;
TTvevaei
;
" otuv avTw So^j}, o) ^ekTiaTe, r) tS
AloXoi. ae yap ovk eiroirjaev o deo^ Tafxiav tmv
17 dvefiayv, dXXd top AioXov. " tl ovv ;
' hel ra
e(^' r}iMV ^eXTicTTa KaTaaKevd^eiv, Tol<; S' dXXoi<i
y^prjcrdat &)<? ire^vKev. " ttco? ovv Trec^VKCv ;^ eo? dv 6 ^eof OiXr}.
18 "'E/xe ovv vvv Tpaxn^Of^^OTTelcrdai fiovov ;" ti ovv ; ijOeXe'i 7rdvTa<i Tpa')(^r]XoK07rT]dfjvai, Iva av
19 Trapap.vdiav e';^^9 ; ov 6eXei<i ovtco^ CKTeivat tov
Tpdxv^ov, o)? AaTepav6<i rt? eV ttj 'Voifir] KeXev-
^ Compare I. ii. 38.
* The exact meaning of ffvii/ievoi is uncertain. lO
BOOK I. I. 11-19
But as it is—let it not escape thee—this body is not thine own, but only clay cunningly compounded.
Yet since I could not give thee this, we have given
thee a certain portion of ourself, this faculty of
choice and refusal, of desire and aversion, or, in a word, the faculty which makes use of external
impressions ; if thou care for this and place all that
thou hast therein, thou shalt never be thwarted, never hampered, shalt not groan, shalt not blame,
shalt not flatter any man. What then ? Are these
things small in thy sight .'' " " Far be it from me ! " " Art thou, then, content with them ? " " I pray
the Gods I may be." ^ But now, although it is in our power to care for one thing only and devote ourselves to but one, we
choose rather to care for many things, and to be
tied fast to many, even to our body and our estate and brother and friend and child and slave. Wherefore,
being tied fast to many things, we are burdened
and dragged down by them. That is why, if the
weather keeps us from sailing, we sit down and
fidget 2 and keep constantly peering about. " What
wind is blowing?" we ask. Boreas. ''What have we
to do with it ? When will Zephyrus blow } " When
it pleases, good sir, or rather when Aeolus pleases.
For God has not made you steward of the winds,
but Aeolus.2 " What then ? " We must make the
best of what is under our control, and take the rest
as its nature is. " How, then, is its nature ? " As
God wills. " Must I, then, be the only one to be beheaded
now ? " Why, did you want everybody to be beheaded
for your consolation ? Are you not willing to
* Alluding to Homer, Odyssey, X. 21. II
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
<T0€l<;v7roTOvN€pa)vo(; d7roKe(f)a\tad7]vai ; e/cretW?
yap TOV Tpd^riXov koX jrXrjyel^; Kol Trpo^ avrrjv
TrjV TrXrjyrjv uaOevrj yevo/j,evr]v eV oXtyov avveX20
Kvadel^; irdXiv i^ereivev. dXXd koI en Trporepov
TTpoaeXOovTt ti<; ^E7ra(f)poBiTa) tm direXevOepu)
TOV NeyO(wi/o<> Kol civaicpLvovTL avrov virep rov
trvyKpovadijvai "^Av ri 6eXa)," (f)r)aiv, " ipw aov
Tft) KvpLW."
21 " Tt ovv Sec TTp6')(eipov e-^eiv ev toi^ toiovtoi^ ; "
Tt ydp dXXo r) Tt efiov Koi n ovk ifiov koI n fioi 22 e^eariv Koi ri fioi ovk e^eariv ; uTrodavelv /me Set* fx^ Ti ovv Kal arevovra ; heOrjvai,' fjbij re koi
6p-qvovvra ; (f)vya8ev9P]vat' jxr) ri^ ovv KtoXvei
yeXwvra Kal evdvfxovvra Kal evpoovvra ; " eiTre 23 TO. cnropprjra" ov Xeyw rovro yap eir e/jLoC icrriv. " dXXa Bijcra) ere." dvdpwTre, ri Xeyet^;
;
ep-e ; to aKeXo^ fiov Si](Tei<;, rr)V irpoaipecnv 8e
24 ovB' 6 Zeu? vLKYjaai hvvarai. " eh ^vXaKrjV ere ^aXS). ' TO crcDfidriov. " aTroKecpaXLcrco ere. irore ovv croi eiTTOV, on fiovov e/nov o rpd')(riXo<; dvarro25
rfx'>ir6<i eanv ; ravra eSet fieXerdv tou? (f)iXoao(f)Ovvra<;
, ravra Kad^ rjfiepav ypdipeiv, ev rovroi<;
yvp,vd^eadat.
26 (tdpacrea^ elcodei Xeyeiv " '^ijp^epov dvaipeOrjvai
27 deXw fxdXXov rj avptov ^vyahevOrjvat,.'" ri ovv avrS 'Pov<f)0<i elTrev ; " Et fxev &>? ^apvrepov
eKXeyrj, rif rj ficopia tt}? €KXoyi]<; ; el 3 co? KOV(f)orepov, ti9 aoi SeSaiKev ; ov OeX€i<; fieXerdv
dpKe2(rdai rS SeSo/xei'ft) ;
1 For all ordinary proper names the reawier is referred to the Index.
^ The point of the retort lies in the defiance of the officious but all-powerful freedman. 12
BOOK I. I. 19-27
stretcb out your neck as did a certain Lateranus^ at Rome, when Nero ordered him to be beheaded ? For he stretched out his neck and received the
blow, but, as it was a feeble one, he shrank back
for an instant, and then stretched out his neck
again. Yes, and before that, when Epaphroditus,
a freedman of Nero, approached a certain man and
asked about the ground of his offence, he answered,
" If I wish anything, I will speak to your master." ^ " What aid, then, must we have ready at hand in such circumstances?" Why, what else than the
knowledge of what is mine, and what is not mine,
and what is permitted me, and what is not permitted
me ? I must die : must I, then, die groaning
too .'' I must be fettered : and wailing too ? I must
go into exile : does anyone, then, keep me from
going with a smile and cheerful and serene? "Tell
your secrets." I say not a word; for this is under
my control. " But I will fetter you." What is that
you say, man ? fetter me ? My leg you will fetter,
but my mqral purpose not even Zeus himself has
power to overcome. " I will throw you into prison."
My paltry body, rather! "I will behead you."
Well, when did 1 ever tell you that mine was the
only neck that could not be severed ? These are the lessons that philosophers ought to rehearse,
these they ought to write down daily, in these they
outrht to exercise themselves.
Thrasea used to say : " I would rather be killed
to-day than banished to-morrow." What, then, did
Rufus say to him ? " If you choose death as the
heavier of two misfortunes, what folly of choice
!
But if as the lighter, who has given you the choice ? Are you not willing to practise contentment with
what has been given you ? " 13
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
28 Ata rovTO yap *Aypi7nrcvo<; ri eXeyev ; on
"'£70) ifxavrw i/MiroSio'; ov yivofiai." drrrjyyeXr] 29 avrS OTt " KpLVT} iv avyKX-qrw"—"^Ayadij rvxv- dXXa rjXdev rj TrifJ-Trrrj " (ravrr) S' elcodeL yvfivaad/ji,€V0'i
y^rvypoXovTpelv)- " aTreXOwfiev Koi yv30
fjLvaad(t)fi€v.^ yvfivaaa/jLevai Xeyet Tt? avTM eXdoov
OTt " KaraKeKpiaai."—" '^vyfj" (^r^aiv, " rj 6avdrw
; "—" 'i>vyf}"—" Ta v-rrdpxovTa Tt ; "
—
" OvK d(f)7jpi6r].^'—" Et<? ^ApUeiav ovv direXdovTes
31 dpcaTi'jaco/jLev."—Tovt eari fie/xeXerrjKevai a Bel
fieXerdv, ope^iv eKKXiaiv dKdtXvra aTrepiTTTcoTa 32 irapecKevaKevai. dirodaveiv fxe Set. et '>]8r], dirodvr)aK(o-
KCLV ^ yuerr oXiyov, vvv dpiarco T/79 u>pa<i
eXdovar)^, elra t6t6 reSv/j^ofiai. Trco? ; co? TrpoarjKCi
Tov rd dXXorpia diroBiSopra.
^. rift)? dv Tf9 acp^oi TO Kara Trpoacoirov iv
iravri
;
1 Teo XoyLKot fooo) fiovov d<popr)T6v iari to dXo2
701^, TO S' evXoyov <f)opT]T6v. irXyjyal ovk elcrlv d(^6priT0L Trj (pvaei.—Tlva Tpoirov ; —'-'Opa ttw?*
AaKehaijMovioi fiaaTLyovvrai p^adovTa oti evXoyov
3 icrriv. —To 8' dirdy^acrdai ovk eaTiv d(f)6pr]T0v ; —
"Oral' yovv irdOj] t<9 oti evXoyov, direXdoyv
1 C. Schenkl : koI S.
1 The idea seems to be: By disregarding externals I do
not hinder the natural course of my mind and character, that is, my true self.
* The word irpdffwirov carries something of the figurative
meaning " role" from the language of drama.
» Referring to the scourging of Spartan youths before the
altar of Artemis.
14
BOOK I. I. 28-11. 3 Wherefore, what was it that Agrippinus used to remark? "1 am not standing in my own way." ^ Word was brought him, " Your case is being tried
in the Senate."—" Good luck betide ! But it is the
fifth hour now " (he was in the habit of taking his exercise and then a cold bath at that hour); "let
us be off and take our exercise." After he had
finished his exercise someone came and told him,
"You have been condemned."—"To exile," says
he, "or to death?"—"To exile." —"What about
my property?"—"It hfts not been confiscated."
—
" Well then, let us go to Aricia and take our lunch
there." This is what it means to have rehearsed
the lessons one ought to rehearse, to have set desire and aversion free from every hindrance and
made them proof against chance. I must die. If forthwith, I die ; and if a little later, I will take
lunch now, since the hour for lunch has come, and
afterwards I will die at the appointed time. How ? As becomes the man who is giving back that which was another's.
CHAPTER II How may a man preserve his proper character^ upon
every occasion ? To the rational being only the irrational is unendurable,
but the rational is endurable. Blows are not by nature unendurable.—How so.'—Observe
how : Lacedaemonians take a scourging ^ once they
have learned that it is rational. —But is it not
unendurable to be hanged ?—Hardly ; at all events
whenever a man feels that it is rational he goes and
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
4 aTTTjiy^aTO. aTrXw? eav irpocre^^wfJ^^v, utt' ovSevo'i
ovTco<i evprjaofxev to ^wov OXt^o/xevov o)? viro rov aXoyov /cal -rrakiv eV ovZiv oyro)? eXKOfievov a)9
enl TO evXayov.
5 AWft) o aX\o irpocnmrTei to evXoyov koI
aXoyov, Kadairep koL dyaOov koI KaKov aXXo
6 dXXoi Kai <TVfjL<^epov koI acrvfK^opov. Sia tovto
fjLoXiaTa TraiSeiWi Beo/xeda, wcrre fxadelv tov ev- Xoyov Kol dXoyov TTpoXTjyjnv Tac<i iirl fiepov; ^
7 ovcTiai^ i(f)app,6^€iv avfi(f)covci)<; Trj (f)va€i. ci? Se
TTjv TOV evXoyov kol dXoyov Kpiaiv ov fwvov Tal<i
T(i>v e'/cT09 d^lai^ avyx^pcojiieda, dXXa koi TOiv
8 KaTa TO TTpoafOTTov eavTov e/cacxTO?. tw yap tivi evXoyov to dfiiSav irapaKpaTelv avTO fiovov fiXeTTOVTi,
OTC fit] TrapaKpaTTjCTa^ P'ev TrXrjya^ XijyfrcTai
Kal Tpo(f)a<i ov Xrj-y^eTai,, irapaKpaT^aw; S' ov
9 nreiaeTai tc Tpa')(y r) dviapov aXXo) 8e tlvl ov
fxovov TO avTov TrapaKpaTijaai d(f)6pr}T0v BoKcl,
dX\d Kol TO dXXov 7rapaKpaT0vvT0<; dvaa-^ecrdat.
10 av ovv fiov TTVvddvT) " TrapaKpaTtjcro) ti^v dfitSav
rj fit]
;
" epca aoi, otl pei^ova d^iav e^et to Xa-
^elv TpO(f>d^ tov fir) Xa^elv Kal p^L^ova dira^iav
TO Baprjvai tov p,T) haprjvai' waT el TOVToa
11 irapapbeTpelf; to, aavTOv, drreXOoov TrapaKpaTCi. " dXTC ovK av KaT ep^k^ tovto ere Bel avvec^-
(f>epeiv et9 Tr)v (TKe-\}nv, ovk epue, av yap ei 6 cravTov ei8a)<;, iroaov a^io^ el creavTO) Kal
TToaov aeavTov imrpdaKeL^;' aXXoi yap aXXcov
trnrpda-Kovavv.
Wolf : ixipos S.
i6
BOOK I. II. 3-II
hangs himself. In short, if we observe, we shall find mankind distressed by nothing so much as by the
irrational, and again attracted to nothing so much
as to the rational. Now it so happens that the rational and the
irrational are different for different persons, precisely
as good and evil, and the profitable and the
unprofitable, are different for different persons. It
is for this reason especially that we need education,
so as to learn how, in conformity with nature, to adapt to specific instances our preconceived idea
of what is rational and what is irrational. But for determining the rational and the irrational, we
employ not only our estimates of the value of
external things, but also the criterion of that which
is in keeping with one's own character. For to one man it is reasonable to hold a chamber-pot for another, since he considers only that, if he does not
hold it, he will get a beating and will not get food,
whereas, if he does hold it, nothing harsh or painful
will be done to him ; but some other man feels that
it is not merely unendurable to hold such a pot himself,
but even to tolerate another's doing so. If you
ask me, then, " Shall I hold the pot or not ? " I will
tell you that to get food is of greater value than not
to get it, and to be flayed is of greater detriment
than not to be ; so that if you measure your interests
by these standards, go and hold the pot. " Yes, but
it would be unworthy of me." That is an additional
consideration, which you, and not I, must introduce
into the question. For you are the one that knows
yourself, how much you are worth in your own eyes
and at what price you sell yourself. For different
men sell themselves at different prices. 17
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
12 Ata TOVTO Aypnnrtvo<; ^Xcopw crKeTTTofidvoi,
ei Karafiareov avrw iajiv et? Ne/3&)ro9 Oecopia^,
oio-re Kal avrov ti Xenovpyrjaai, ecprj " Kara13
^r)Oc.^ TrvOofiivov S' avrov " Aia rt av ov kutu14
^aivei^ ; " e(^ri oti " 'E7&) ovSe ^ov\€vofx,ai." 6 yap ana^ ea rrjv irepl rSiv tolovtwv crKeyfrtv Kal
TO<? T(t)p eKro<; a^ia<i (rvyKadel<i Kal ^jrrjipl^cov
eyyv<i iari twv €7ri\€\r]a-/j,eva)v rov ihiov irpo15
(TOiTTOv. TL yap fiov "Trvvdavrj ; " ddvaro<i alpe16
Toorepov eariv rj ^coj] ; " Xeyco ^(otj. " 7r6vo<i rj TjSovi]
;
' \eyoi tjSovi]. " aXkd, dv firj Tpayahi^aw,
Tpa^rjXoKOTryjd^aofiai." direXde roivvv Kal rpa17
ycphei, eyo) S' ov Tpaywhrjaw. " 8id tl ; " on av
aeavTov rjyfi jxiav Tivd elvai KpoKrjv rcov ck rov
XtT(Ovo^. Tt ovv ; (re eSet (f)povTl^€t,v Tr&i? dv
6/jiOio<t ^ 779 T0t9 dX\oi<; dvdpci)7roi<;, wairep ovS'
77 KpoKTj 7rpo<i Ta9 dWa<i KpoKa^; deXei ti 6-)(€lv 18 i^aiperov. iyco 8e iropc^vpa elvai ^ovXa/xai, to
o\iyov eKeivo Kal ariXTrvov Kal Tot9 d\Xot<i atrcov
Tov evTTpeTrr) (f>ai.v€a6ac Kal KoXd. ri ovv fioi Xeyea oti " i^ofioi(oOi]Ti T0t9 ttoXXoU "
; Kal iroof €Ti 7rop<j>vpa ecrofiai ; 19 TavTa elBev Kal HpL(rK0<; 'EXovibio<; Kal ISoiv
iiToiricre. 7rpoa-7refiyjrapTo<; avTUi Ovecnraaiavoi), iva
fir) elaeXOrj el<; ttjv (TvyKXrjTov, direKpivaTO "'EttI
croi €(TTt fiT) idaai fie elvai avyKXrfTLKOv fiexpt 20 Be dv S>, hel fie el(Tep-)(e(j6aL.^^ " dye aXV etV-
^ av6^Loios Schenkl, after Blass.
^ This was clearly the contribution to Nero's festival which Florui was expected to make.
18
BOOK I. II. I2-20
Wherefore, when Florus was debating whether he
should enter Nero's festival, so as to make some
personal contribution to it, Agrippinus said to him,
"Enter." And when Florus asked, "Why do you
not enter yourself?" he replied, "I? why, I do
not even raise the question." For when a man
once stoops to the consideration of such questions,
I mean to estimating the value of externals, and
calculates them one by one, he comes very close
to those who have forgotten their own proper
character. Come, what is this you ask me ? " Is death or life preferable.''" I answer, life. "Pain
or pleasure .'' " I answer, pleasure. " But unless I take a part in the tragedy ^ I shall be beheaded."
Go, then, and take a part, but I will not take a part.
"Why not?" Because you regard yourself as but
a single thread of all that go to make up the garment.
What follows, then ? This, that you ought
to take thought how you may resemble all other
men, precisely as even the single thread wants to have no point of superiority in comparison with the
other threads. But / want to be the red,^ that small
and brilliant portion which causes the rest to appear
comely and beautiful. Why, then, do you say to me, " Be like the majority of people ? " And if I do
that, how shall I any longer be the red ? This is what Helvidius Priscus also saw, and,
having seen, did. When Vespasian sent him word
not to attend a meeting of the Senate, he answered,
" It is in your power not to allow me to be a member of the Senate, but so long as I am one
I must attend its meetings." " Very well then, but
* Tiie reference is to the band of bright red (commonly
called " purple ") woven into the hem of the toga praetexta.
19
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EFICTETUS
eXOcOV," (f)1](Tl,V, " (TKOTTIJCrOv" " fit] fl €^€Ta^€ KOi
cTfcoTTT^Cft)." " aWa Bel fxe i^eTacrai. " KUfie
21 eliretv to (f>ai,v6fL€vov BiKaiov." " aW eav etiTr)^,
aTTOKTevoi cre.^^ " irore ovv aoi elTrov, on addvaTo^
elfii ; kuI au to aov fronjcrei^ Kayo) to
ifiov. (TOP itTTLV aTTOKreivai, e^iov diroQavelv fit] rpifwvTa' aov t^vyahevaai, e/xov i^ekOelv jjbt] 22 \v7rov/j,€POV. Tt ovv co^eA,77cre Ilpicr/co? et9 (ov ; Tt S' Q}(f)€\€l rj 7rop(f)vpa to i/xdriov ; ri yap aXko
T) SiaTrpeirec ev avro) &>? Tropcjivpa kui toI'; aXkoi<;
23 Be KoKov irapaBeiy[xa exKeirai ; aX\o<; 8 av
elirovro^ avTO) K.aiaapo^ iv roLavTrj TrepicTTaaei
/XTj e\6elv eU crvyKKrjTov elirev " €xu> ;\;apti', OTt
24 p,ov (f>eLBT)." Tov Toiovrov ovB av eKooXuev eicr- eXOelv, dXyJ rjSei, on rj KaOeBelroL co^ Kepd/Miov rj Xeyoiv epet, a olBev on 6 K«iO"ap Oe\ei, Kat,
irpoaeTTLCKopevaeL en irXeLova.
25 TouToy TOV rpoTTOv Kul dOXT)Ti']<; n<i KivBvvevcov
diToOavelv, el firj dire/coiTri to aloolou, eTreXdovTOfi
avTO) TOV dBeX^ov (j)v 5' eKelvo<; (f)iXo(TO(f)o<;) koi
elirovTO'i " dye, dheX<^e, Tt p,eXXei<i iroielv ; airoKOTTTop.ev
TOVTO TO p.epo<i Kal €Tt eh yvfivdaiov
Trpoep)(^6fieda ;" o^% vTre/xeivev, dXX iyKapTep7]aa<i
26 diredavev. TrvOop^evov Be Ttvo<;' XIco? tovto erroi- rjaev ; o)? dOXyTt]'} rj 009 (f)tX6ao(f)0<; ; H? ^ dvrjp^
e(f)r], dvrjp B* ^OXvfnna KeKr]pvy/J,evo<i Kal rjycovKr-
* Added by s. 20
BOOK I. 11. 20-26
when you attend, hold your peace." "Do not ask
for my opinion and I will hold my peace." " But 1 must ask for your opinion." "And I must answer what seems to me right." " But if you speak, I shall put you to death." "Well, when did I ever
tell you that I was immortal ? Y'ou will do your
part and I mine. It is yours to put me to death,
mine to die without a tremor ; yours to banish, mine
to leave without sorrow." What good, then, did
Priscus do, who was but a single individual? And
what good does the red do the mantle ? What
else than that it stands out conspicuous in it as
red, and is displayed as a goodly example to the
rest ? But had Caesar told another man in such
circumstances not to attend the meetings of the
Senate, he would have said, " I thank you for excusing me." A man like that Caesar would not even have tried to keep from attending, but would
have known that he would either sit like a jug, or,
if he spoke, would say what he knew Caesar wanted
said, and would pile up any amount more on the
top of it. In like manner also a certain athlete acted, who
was in danger of dying unless his private parts were
amputated. His brother (and he was a philosopher)
came to him and said, "Well, brother, what are you going to do.'' Are we going to cut off this member, and step forth once more into the gymnasium?"
He would not submit, but hardened his
heart and died. And as someone asked, " How did
he do this? As an athlete, or as a philosopher?"
As a man, replied Epictetus ; and as a man who had
been proclaimed at the Olympic games and had
striven in them, who had been at home in such
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
fievo^, iv TOiavrj] rivl X^P9 o,v€arpafifieuo<i, ov')(i 27 TTapa rS> Bdrcovi ^ a\ei(f)6/u,€vo<;. aX\o(f Be kclv tov
Tpd'^rjXov cnreTfit'jdr), el ^rjv rjBvvaro Bi')(^a tov rpa28
'XrfS.ov. ToiovTov e(TTt to Kara irpoawTrov' ovr(o<i
laxvpov TTapa rot? eldi,crjj,evoc^ avro (Tweicr^epeiv
29 e^ avTMV evraU aKeyJreaiv. " dye ovu, ^ILjrLKTTjTe,
Sia^vprjcrat,.^ av w (})i\.6cro(j)o<;, X-eyo), " ov Sia^vpcofiai.
" aW d<pe\(i!) aov tov Tpd'^rjXov.^^ el aol
dp^eivoi', a(f>€\e. 30 'ETTy^ero Ti9* Il60ev ovv aladrjaofieda tov KaTh
TrpocrcoTTOv €KacrT0<;
;
—IloOev B 6 Tavpo^, e(^r}, XeovTOS eireXdovTO^ p,6vo<i alaOdveTat. rr;? avTOv
7rapa(TKeurj<; xal irpo^e^XriKev eavTov virep t%
d'ye\T]<i Trdar]^ ; rj hrfkov oTi evdix; a/ia t& ttjp
TrapacTKevTjv €')(€iv aTravTO, KaX avvaicrdTjai'i avTrjf;
;
31 KaX rjfMCov Toivvv 6aTi<i av exj) ToiavTrjv irapa32
(TKevr)v, ovk dyvorjaei avTTjV. dcfivco 8e Tavpo<; ov yiveTai ovSe yevvaio<i dv9poiTro<i, dWd Bel
XeipacTKriaaL, irapacrKevdcraadat, koX firj elKj}
7rpo(T7rr]Bdv eVl to, p,7]Bev Trpocr^KOVTa.
33 Movov <TKe\jfai, rroaov 7ra>\el<i ttjv aeavTOv
TTpoaipeaiv. dvOpcoTre, el p-rjBev dWo, firj oXiyov
avTrjV 7T(i)'\.T]ar]^. to Be jxeya Kal i^alpeTov dWoi<;
Td-^CL 7rpoai]Kei, ^(OKpaTei Kal toi? toiovtoc';.—
34 Aid tL ovv, el irpo'i tovto Tr€(f)VKafjL€v, ov Traj/re?
^ Scaliger : Pdraii S.
^ Bato seems to have been a well-knowii athletic trainer of the time. At least one, and possibly two gladiators at Rome
bore this name. C.I.L. I. 718, VI. 10188.
2 Philosophers, especially Stoics and Cynics, regularly wore beards in antiquity. See I. 16, 9 ff.
BOOK I. II. 26-34
places, and had not merely been rubbed down with
oil in Bato's^ wrestling school. But another would
have had even his neck cut off, if he could have
lived without his neck. This is what we mean by
regard for one's proper character; and such is its strength with those who in their deliberations
habitually make it a personal contribution. " Come
then, Epictetus, shave off your beard."* If I am a philosopher, I answer, " I will not shave it off" " But
I will take off your neck." If that will do you any
good, take it off. Someone inquired, " How, then, shall each of us become aware of what is appropriate to his own
proper character? " How comes it, replied he, that
when the lion charges, the bull alone is aware of his own prowess and rushes forward to defend the whole
herd ? Or is it clear that with the possession of the
prowess comes immediately the consciousness of it also? And so, among us too, whoever has such
prowess will not be unaware of it. Yet a bull does not become a bull all at once, any more than a man becomes noble, but a man must undergo a winter training,^ he must prepare himself and must
not plunge recklessly into what is inappropriate for him.
Only consider at what price you sell your freedom
of will. If you must sell it, man, at least do not sell it cheap. But the great and pre-eminent deed, perhaps,
befits others, Socrates and men of his stamp. —Why
then, pray, if we are endowed by nature for such
' Ancient armies generally disbanded or went into permanent quarters during the winter To continue
military training throughout the winter months was indic- ative of a sincere and strennoos endeavour.
23
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
^ TToA-Xot yivovrat. toiovtoc ;—"Ittttoi, yap ci)Kei<; airavTe^ yivovrai, Kvve^ yap l')(yevri,Kol rrravTe^
;
35 ri ovv ; eireihrj a(f)V7]<; ei/JLi, aTroaroi tt}? eim,fie\eia<i 36 rovTOV ev€Ka ; firj yevono. 'ETri^rr^TO? Kpelaa(ov
XcoKparov; ovk ecnai' ei he p,r\, ov ^(^eipwv, 37 TOVTO fioi iKavov iariv. ovSe yap MCXwv ecro/jLai
Kal ofiox; OVK afieKS) tov a(Ofx,aT0<;' ouSe Kpotcro?
Kal ofico<i OVK dfMe\(o tt}? Krr)aea)<i' ovZ^ aTrXo)?
aWov rLvo<i t?}? eTrt/z-eXeta? hia rrjv aTToyvoxTtv
TOiV UKpCOV d(j)taTd/jL€6a.
y . Ilfti? dv Ti9 aTTO tov tov deov iraTepa elvai
T&v dvdpdiirwv irrl Ta k^rj<i eireKdov ;
1 Et Ti9 Tw Soy/xaTi tovtw avfiiraOrjCTaL /car' d^iav Svi'aiTO, otl yeyovajxev viro tov deov Trai/re?
TrporjyovfievQ)'; Kal 6 ^eo? TraTrjp ean twv r dvdpcoTTMv Kol TOiv Oecov, oljiiai OTi ovSev dyevve^i
2 ovhe Taireivov evOvixi^dtjaeTai, irepl eavTov. dXK!
dv /nev Kalaap elaTrof^crrjTai, ae, ouSet? crov ttjv
6(f)pvv ^aaTaaer dv he yva)<i, OTt tov Ato? vi6<; 3 et, OVK e7rapdi](XT] ; vvv 5' ov iroiovfiev, dX>C
eTTeihr] hvo TavTU iv t^ yeveaei rj/j,(ov eyKaTafiefxiKTai,
TO aoip,a /nev Koivov irpo'i to, ^wa, 6 X6709 he Kal rj yvcofir) koivov irpo^ tou? deov<i,
dWoL fiev eVt TavTtjv diTOK\lvov<7i,v ttjv avyyeveiav
ttjv dTV')(ri Kal veKpdv, oXiyot, hi TCV€<i 4 eVl Tr]V deiav Kal fiaKaplav. eTreihrj tolvvv
BOOK I. II. 34-in. 4
greatness, do not all men, or many, become like him ? What, do all horses become swift, all dogs
keen to follow the scent ? What then ? Because 1 have no natural gifts, shall I on that account give up
my discipline ? Far be it from me ! Epictetus will not be better than Socrates ; but if only I am not
worse, that suffices me. For I shall not be a Milo,
either, and yet I do not neglect my body ; nor a Croesus, and yet I do not neglect my property ; nor,
in a word, is there any other field in which we give
up the appropriate discipline merely from despair
of attaining the highest.
CHAPTER III From the thesis that God is the father of mankind
how may one proceed to the consequences ? If a man could only subscribe heart and soul, as he ought, to this doctrine, that we are all primarily
begotten of God, and that God is the father of men
as well as of gods, I think that he will entertain no
ignoble or mean thought about himself. Yet, if Caesar adopts you no one will be able to endure
your conceit, but if you know that you are a son of
Zeus, will you not be elated? As it is, however, we
are not, but inasmuch as these two elements were
comingled in our begetting, on the one hand the
body, which we have in common with the brutes,
and, on the other, reason and intelligence, which we
have in common with the gods, some of us incline
toward the former relationship, which is unblessed
by fortune and is mortal, and only a few toward that
which is divine and blessed. Since, then, it is inevitVOL,
I. C *5
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
dvd<yKrj irdvO^ ovtivovv ovrco'; eKdcnm ')(^prja6aL
0)9 av irepi avrov viroXd/Brj, eKelvoi fiev oi oXlyoi,
ocroi Trpo<i ttlcttiv otovrai yejovivac koI 7rp6<;
acBa) Kai irpo'i dacpdXeiav ti)^ ')(^prjaew'i twv (pavracricov,
ovSev raireivov ouS' dy€vv€<i ivdv/jLOvvrai
5 Trepl avroiv, ol he ttoWoX rdvavTia. " ri yap
61/x.t ; rdkavTTOipov dvBpcoTrdpiov " koI " rd Svcrrrjvd
6 pou crapKiSia. t&j p,ev ovrt Svcrrrjpa, dWd €')(ei<i Ti Kol Kpelaaov rwv aapKihucov. rt ovv d(f)€l<; eKelvo TOVTOL<; 7rpoareTr]Ka<;
;
7 Ata ravTTjv ttjv avyyiveiav ol p,ev d'iroKXivavTe<i
XvKOL<i 6p,oioi yivopbeOa, aTriaTOi kuI eiri^ovXoi
Kal ^Xa^epoi, ol he Xeovcriv, dypioi kuI 6r]pia)8et^
KoX dvi'jpiepoi,, ol 'irXelov<i K rjp,a)v dXdiTreKef Kal
8 ft)9 iv ^(poL<; aTvy^TJpara. ri ydp iariv dXXo Xoihopo<i
Kal KaKOt]dij<; dvdpwTro^ rj dXcoirr]^ rj ri
9 aXXo LLrv')(^earepov Kal TaireLvoTepov ; opdre ovv
Kal 7rpoae)(^6Te, jjirj ti tovtcov dirofirjTe twv drv-
"^ripbdraiv.
8'. Ylepl TrpoK07rT]<i
1 'O irpoKOTnoiv p,epadi]Kd)<i Trapd rcov (f>iXoa6<f}(ov
OTi Tj pev op€^L<i dyadcov icmv, 77 S' €KKXi(Ti<i tt^o? KaKd,^ p.e/j.aOtjKcb'i 8e Kal otl ovk dXX(i)<; to
evpovv Kal diraOe^; irepiyiveTai, Ta> dvdpcoTro) 77 €V opi^ei p,€v p,rj dirorvyx^dvovTi,, iv eKKXiaei, he
^ Sd : Ka\a S.
^ The characteristic moral achievement which the Stoics sought. The metaphor in the first expression, rh eSpovy, is admirably rendered by Seneca, Epist. 120. 11, beata vita, secundo defluens cwrsu. 26
BOOK I. in. 4-iv. i
able that every man, whoever he be, should deal
with each thing according to the opinion which he
forms about it, these few, who think that by their
birth they are called to fidelity, to self-respect, and to unerring judgement in the use of external impressions,
cherish no mean or ignoble thoughts about themselves,
whereas the multitude do quite the opposite.
" For what am I ? A miserable, paltry man,"
say they, and, "Lo, my wretched, paltry flesh!"
Wretched indeed, but you have also something
better than your paltry flesh. Why then abandon
that and cleave to this?
It is because of this kinship with the flesh that
those of us who incline toward it become like wolves,
faithless and treacherous and hurtful, and others
like lions, wild and savage and untamed ; but most
of us become foxes, that is to say, rascals of the
animal kingdom. For what else is a slanderous
and malicious man but a fox, or something even more rascally and degraded ? Take heed, therefore,
and beware that you become not one of these
rascally creatures.
CHAPTER IV
Of progress
He who is making progress, having learned of the
philosophers that desire is for things good and
aversion is toward things evil, and having also
learned that serenity and calm^ are not attained by a man save as he succeeds in securing the objects of
desire and as he avoids encountering the objects of
27
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
fiT} TrepnrLTTTOvrt, ttjv fiev ope^iv r/pxev i^ avrov
eladirav rj ^ virepTeOeirat, tj} eKKkCaet Se tt/do?
2 fiova )(prJTai ra irpoatperLKa, ruiv yap airpoaipercov
av ti eKKXlvr), olSev on TrepiTrecrelTai, irork
Tivi irapa rrjv eKKXiaiv rrjv avrov Kal Svarvx^^crei.
3 6t 8' 77 dperr) ravrrjv e%ei t^v eirayyeXiav evhaifioviav
irotrjcraL Kal aTrdOeiav Kal evpoiav, Travro)?
Kal r) TrpoKOTTT) tj 7rpo9 avrrjv tt/jo? eKacnov tov4
T(ov earl irpoKoin]. del yap 7rpo<; b avi^ reXeiOTi;?
Tivo<i KaOdira^ ^yV> Trpo? avro t) npOKOTrr) avveyyia/jLOi;
eariv.
5 Ilai? ovv rrjv p,ev dpe-rr^v toiovtov Tt 6fio\oyovfiev,
TTjV TrpoKOTTTjv B iv dWot<: ^ijTOvp.ev Kal
6 eiriheiKVvp.ev ; rt epyov dp€Tr](; ; evpoia. Tt? ovv
TTpoKOirrev ; 6 TroXXa? ^pvaiirirov a-vvTd^ei<;
7 dveyv(i}K(ji)<i ; /xrj yap rj dperrj tovt eari X.pvaL7rirov
vevoTjKevai ; el yap tovt ecrTiv, op.o\oyovlieva><i
T] irpoKOirrj ovBev dWo iarlv rj rb TroWd
8 Ttov ^pvcriinrov voeiv. vvv S' dXKo p.ev ti rrjv
dpeTrjv eTrL<^epeiv ofio\oyovfjLev, dWo Be top avv9
eyyiap-ov, Tr}v TrpoKoirriv, dirocfiaLPop.ev. " outo<?,"
(f>r)(TLV, " ^Br] Kal Bt avTOV BvvaTat ^pvcmnrov
dvayiyvwaKeivT eu, vr) tov^ Oeov<{, irpOKOirTei'i,
10 dvOpooTTe' "noiav TrpoKOTnjv. " ri efxirai^ei^ avTa>
;
Ti S' dirdyei^ avrov rrj'i avvaLaOr]aeQ)<i roiv avrov
KaKUiV ; ov de\eL<; Bel^at avrw to epyov Tr)<i dpe-
^ Koraes : Kal S. 28
BOOK I. IV. i-io
aversion—such a one has utterly excluded desire
from himself, or else deferred it to another time,^ and
feels aversion only toward the things whicli involve
freedom of choice. For if he avoids anything that is not a matter of free choice, he knows that some time
he will encounter something in spite of his aversion
to it, and will come to grief. Now if it is virtue that
holds out the promise thus to create happiness and
calm and serenity, then assuredly progress toward
virtue is progress toward each of these states of mind.
For it is always true that whatsoever the goal toward
which perfection in anything definitely leads,
progress is an approach thereto.
How comes it, then, that we acknowledge virtue
to be a thing of this sort, and yet seek progress and
make a display of it in other things ? What is the
work^ of virtue? Serenity. Who, then, is making
progress ? The man who has read many treatises of
Chrysippus } What, is virtue no more than this—to have gained a knowledge of Chrysippus ? For if it is this, progress is confessedly nothing else than a knowledge of many of the works of Chrysippus.
But now, while acknowledging that virtue produces one thing, we are declaring that the approach to
virtue, which is progress, produces something else. "So-and-so," says someone, "is already able to read
Chrysippus all by himself." It is fine headway, by
the gods, that you are making, man ! Great progress
this ! " Why do you mock him .' And why do you
try to divert him from the consciousness of his own
shortcomings .'' Are you not willing to show him the
^ See the Enchtiridum, II. 2 : " But for the present totally make way with desire."
* t.«., the result at which virtue aims. 29
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
11 tt}?, Iva fidOrj TTOV rr]V TrpoKOirrjv ^rjrfj ; " ixel
^r)T7]crov avrrjv, TaXaiirwpe, oirov crov to epyov.
TTOV Si crov TO epyov ; iv ope^ei koX eKKXiaei, Xv ava-norevKTO^ 779 KaX uTreptTTTcoTO^;, iv 6pp,al<i
Kal acfyopfxali;, Iv avap.dpTr^ro<i, iv irpoadeaei, koX
12 i7ro)(^fj, IV dve^a7rdT7]T0<;. TrpcoToi, S' elalv ol TrpcoToi TOTTOi Kai avayKaioTaroi. av Se rpefifov
Kal TcevdSiv ^riTT]<; a7re/o/7rT<WTO? elvai, dpa 7r&>9 TT/JO/COTTTet? ; 13 Su ovv ivravdd /jloi Bel^ov aov T'qv irpoKoiri^v.
Kadd-nep et, ddXrjTfj BieXeyofirjv " Sel^ov fioi tov<;
«w/x.oi;9." eiTa eXeyev iK€tvo<; " tSe p,ov Tov<i dXTrjpa<i.
' diriOi ^ av Kal ol dXTi]p€<;, iyo) to utto14
reXecTfia Tcav dXTrjpoiv ISelv ^ovXof^ai. " Xd^e ttjv
ireplopfirj^ crvvra^iv Kalyvcodc 7r(W9 aurrjv dveyvwKa.
dvSpdiroBov, ov tovto ^^jtm, dXXd 7ra)9 op/xd^
Kal a(f>opp,a<;, 7rft)9 opiyr) Kal iKKXcv€i<;, 77009 eVt/SaXXr]
2 Kal TrpoTideaai ^ Kal TrapacrKevd^rj, irorepa
15 crv/j,(f)(t)V(i)<; rfj (f)vcr€i r) dav/x(f)(t)VQ)<;. el yap (TVfi-
<^(ov(o<i, TOVTO p,oi heiKwe Kal ipco croi oti TrpoKOTTTei'i.
el S" davfi^cov(o<;, drreXOe Kal /u,r) p,6vov
i^rjyov TO, ^L^Xia, dXXd Kal ypdt^e auT09 TOf1
i-niOi (cf. &vt\Be § 15) Capps : o^ei S.
^ Schweighauser : emQaWfis S.
' Salmasius and Upton's ' codex ' : irpoffriBeffai S.
^ These are the three spheres or fields {riiroi) of human
activity, inclination, choice, and intellectual assent, upon
which the Stoics laid great stress. For a fuller discussion see below III 2, 1 flF. * Broad-jumpers in antiquity carried weights which on
being thrust backwards while the jumper was in mid-air seem to have added materially to the distance covered. 30
BOOK I. IV. 10-15
work of virtue, that he may learn where to look for his progress ? " Look for it there, wretch, where your
work lies. And where is your work ? In desire and
aversion, that you may not miss what you desire and
encounter what you would avoid ; in choice and in
refusal, that you may commit no fault therein ; in giving and withholding assent of judgement, that
you may not be deceived.^ But first come the first and most necessary points. Yet if you are in a state of fear and grief when you seek to be proof against
encountering what you would avoid, how, pray, are you making progress ? Do you yourself show me, therefore, your own
progress in matters like the following. Suppose, for example, that in talking to an athlete I said, " Show
me your shoulders," and then he answered, "Look
at my jumping-weights." ^ Go to, you and your
jumping-weights I What I want to see is the effect of the jumping-weights. "Take the treatise Upon
Choice ^ and see how I have mastered it." It is not
that I am looking into, you slave, but how you act in your choices and refusals, your desires and aversions,
how you go at things, and apply yourself to them,
and prepare yourself, whether you are acting in harmony with nature therein, or out of harmony with
it. For if you are acting in harmony, show me that,
and I will tell you that you are making progress
;
but if out of harmony, begone, and do not confine
yourself to expounding your books, but go and write
These same weights were also used like our (lumb-l)ells for the development of the arm and trunk muscles, as is apparently the case here.
• The title, apparently, of a short work by Chrysippus, but
known only from this passage. Zeno and Cleanthes wrote
also on the subject.
31
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
16 avTa. KoX Tt aoi 6(f>€\o<; ; ovk ot8a<; oti oXov
TO ^i^Xlov irivre 8j]vap[cov iariv ; 6 ovv i^ijjovfi€vo<i
avTo 8oK€i on irXeiovoii a^i6<; eariv rf irevre
17 Srjvapicov ; /jLrjSeTroTe ovv aXXw^^ov to ep<yov ^rjTeire,
aXXa^ov rrjv TTpoKOTrrjv.
18 IIoG ovv irpOKOTTrj ; el TL<i v/xcov aTToaTh<i rSiV
€KTo<; iirl Tijv Trpoaipeauv eirecrrpaTrTat, rrjv avrov,
Tavrrjv i^epyd^ea-dai koX iKTroveiv, axne avp.-
(f)Q)vov aTToreXecrai t^ (pvaei,, vyfrrjXrjv eXevOepav
19 aKcoXvTOv dve/jLTToSicTTOv TTKTTTjv alSjjfiova' fie- fiddrjKev T€, on 6 rd firj i<f) avr& ttoOmv rj <f)evycov ovre TnaTO'i elvai Svvarai oirr' iXevdepo<;,
dXX" avdyKT] [xeTaTTirrreiv koI fierappnn^eadai
afia eKeivoi^ Kal avrov, dvdjKr] Se koX VTrorerap^eyat
dXXoi^ iavrov, rot? CKelva irepiiroielv t) 20 KcoXveiv 8vvap,evo(,<i' Kal Xoiirov emdev dviardp^vo<i
ravra rrjpec Kal ^vXdaaei, Xoverai q)<; TTio-ro?, (B9
alhrjpLCOv eaOiei, (wcrauTO)? eVi t^9 del irapaTnTrrovarjf;
vXr)<; tu Trpoijjov/jieva €kttov(ov, ax; 6 8pop,€v<; 21 8po/jLiKa)<; Kal 6 <f)d)vacrK0<; ^wvaarKLKW^' owtos
ecrrtv 6 irpoKoirTcov rat? dXr]decai<; Kai o /mtj eiKfi 22 d'iro8e8riiMrjKO)^ ovtos ia-nv. el 8' eTrl rrjv iv rot?
/3i^Xioi<; e^iv rerarai Kal ravrrjv eKTrovei Kal
cttI tovto eK8e8rjfxriKe, Xeyto avr<f> avrodev tto- 23 peveadai el<i oIkov Kal pit) dp^Xelv rcbv eKel' rovTO
3«
BOOK I. IV. 15-23 some of the same kind yourself. And what will you
gain thereby? Do you not know that the whole
book costs only five denarii ? Is the expounder of it^ then, think you, worth more than five denarii ? And
so never look for your work in one place and your
progress in another.
Where, then, is progress ? If any man among you,
withdrawing from external things, has turned his attention to the question of his own moral purpose,
cultivating and perfecting it so as to make it finally
harmonious with nature, elevated, free, unhindered,
untrammelled, faithful, and honourable ; and if he
has learned that he who craves or shuns the things
that are not under his control can be neither
faithful nor free, but must himself of necessity be
changed and tossed to and fro with them, and must
end by subordinating himself to others, those,
namely, who are able to procure or prevent these
things that he craves or shuns ; and if, finally, when
he rises in the morning he proceeds to keep and
observe all this that he has learned ; if he bathes as a faithful man, eats as a self-respecting man,
—
similarly, whatever the subject matter mav be with
which he has to deal, putting into practice his guiding principles, as the runner does when he
applies the principles of running, and the voicetrainer
when he applies the principles of voicetraining,—this
is the man who in all truth is making
progress, and the man who has not travelled at random is this one. But if he has striven merely to attain the state which he finds in his books and
works only at that, and has made that the goal of
his travels, I bid him go home at once and not
neglect his concerns there, since the goal to which
33
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
'yap icf)' o airohehrjp.rjKev ovhkv ecrriv aW' eKelvo,
fieXerdv e^eXeiv rov avrov fiiov irevOrj koX olfia>ya<i
Kul TO ^ " otfioi" Kal TO " TaXa? iyco" kuI Svarv24
%ta;/ Kal arv^diav Kal p,a6elv, tL iari 6dvaT0<;,
tL <f>v'yrj, ri Sea/ncoTypiov, ri Kcoveiov, iva SvptjTai
T^yeiv iv rfj <f)v\aKfj " Si (piXe Kpircov, el ravTrj
rol<i deol'i (f)L\ov, Tavrrj 'yiveaOw,^^ Kal /xrj eKetra " TaXa? iyeo, 'yepcov dvdpco7ro<;, eVi Tavrd fiov Ta?
25 7r6\id<i errjprjcra.^^ tl^ Xiyei ravra ; hoKelre on
vfiLV d8o^6v Tiva €p(a Kal Taireivov ; Ilptafxo<;
avra ov Xeyei ; OISlttov^ ov Xejet ; aXV oiroaoi
26 PacnXei<i Xeyovaiv ; ri yap elaiv aXXo rpayuiSlai
rj avOpcoTTcov irddr] redavpuKOTtov rd e«T09 Bed
27 p^erpov toiovS' eTnheiKvvpeva ; el yap e^airarr}-
devra rivd eBei padelv, on, tS)v c'/cto? Kal ^ dirpoaipircov
ovSev ean 7rpo<; Tjp,ds, eyd) pev rjdeXov
Tr)v aTrdrrjv ravrrjv, e^ ^9 r}p,eXXov evpoco^ Kal
drapd')((a<i ^icoaeaOat, vp,€i<i 8' oyfread^ avrol ri
deXere.
28 'Ti ovv rjplv irapeyei l^pvannro(; ; " tva yvq)<iy'^
(f>riaiv, " on ov yjrevBri ravra iarcv, i^ ayv rj 29 evpoid ean koi dirddeia drravra, Xdfie p,ov rd
^i^Xla Kal yvcoar] go? aKoXovdd ^ re Kal avp,-
(ficovd ean rfj (pvcrei rd drradr) pe iroiovvra."
0) peydX7)<; evrvxia<i, w peydXov evepyerov rov
30 8eiKi'vovro<; rrjv ohov. elra TpnrroXepo) p,ev lepd
1 Added by Schweighauser.
• Supplied by Upton.
* Supplied by SchenkU
34
BOOK I. IV. 23-30
he has travelled is nothing ; but not so that other
goal—to study how a man may rid his life of sorrows and lamentations, and of such cries as "Woe
is me ! " and " Wretch that I am ! " and of misfortune
and failure, and to learn the meaning of
death, exile, prison, hemlock ; ^ that he may be able
to say in prison, " Dear Crito, if so it pleases the
gods, so be it," ^ rather than, " Alas, poor me, an old
man, it is for this that I have kept my grey hairs !
"
Who says such things ? Do you think that I will name you some man held in small esteem and of
low degree ? Does not Priam say it ? Does not
Oedipus ? Nay more, all kings say it ! For what
are tragedies but the portrayal in tragic verse of the
sufferings of men who have admired things external ? If indeed one had to be deceived ^ into learning
that among things external and independent of our
free choice none concerns us, I, for my part, should
consent to a deception which would result in my
living thereafter serenely and without turmoil ; but
as for you, you will yourselves see to your own
preference.
What, then, does Chrysippus furnish us .' " That
you may know," he says, " that these things are not
false from which serenity arises and tranquillitv comes to us, take my books and you shall know how
conformable and harmonious with nature are the
things which render me tranquil." O the great
good fortune ! O the great benefactor who points
the way ! To Triptolemus, indeed, all men have
^ The poison with which Socrates was put to death.
« Plato, CrUo, 43 D.
' Probably by witnessing tragedies, the plots of which,
although fictitious, may teach moral lessons. 35
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Kol ^cofjbov^ iravre^ avdpcoiroi avea-raKacnv,' on
31 To,^ Tj/jiepou^ Tpo(f>a<; rjfiiv eScoKev, rat 8e ttjv
aXrjdeiav evpovri koI (fxariaavTi Kal eh 7rdvra<i
avdpa>'rrov<; i^evey/covri, ov r-qv irepl to ^-fju, aXXa
Trjv TTpo'; TO ev ^rjv, Ti<; vp,oiv iirl rovro) ^cofiov
iSpvaUTO rj vaov r) dyaXfia avedr]K€v r) rov deov
32 eVl TouTco irpoaKvvei ; aW' on fiev d/LLireXov eh(OKav ri Trvpovi, itridvop^ev tovtov evcKa, on Be TocovTOv e^rjveyKav Kapwov iv dvOpcoirLVt) Btapoia,
8i ov TT]v aXrjdeiav rrjv irepl €vhaifiovia<; Sei^eiv
rjfilv rjp^eWov, tovtov 5' eveKa ouk ev-^^^apiaTrja(Ofxev
TO) dew ;
€. 11/30? Tot"? ^ AKa8r}fiaiKov<i
1 "Ax; Tt9, <^riaiv, eviarr^rai irpo^ rd d<yav eK-
(pavfj, 7r/909 TOVTOV ov paBiov ecTTiv evpelv Xoyov,
2 Bi" ov p,eTairei(Tei Ti<i avTov. tovto 5' ovTe Trapd
rrjv eKelvov yiveTai Bvvafiiv oine irapa tyjv tov
Bi8dcrK0VT0<s dadeveiav, aXlC oTav avra^^et? diro-
\i6oi9fi, 770)9 eVt 'X,pr]a-r)Tai Ti<; avTw Bid Xoyov ;
^ The phrase is from Plato, Crito, 48 b.
* Referring probably to the mind of Chrysippus.
' See also II. 20. 4. Epictetus condemns the exaggerations
of the Academic principle of suspended judgement, which
36
BOOK I. IV. 30-v. 2
established shrines and altars, because he gave us as food the fruits of cultivation, but to him who has
discovered, and brought to light, and imparted to
all men the truth which deals, not with mere life, but with a good life,^—who among you has for that
set up an altar in his honour, or dedicated a temple
or a statue, or bows down to God in gratitude for
him ? But because the gods have given us the vine
or wheat, for that do we make sacrifice, and yet
because they have brought forth such a fruit in a human mind,^ whereby they purposed to show us the truth touching happiness, shall we fail to render
thanks unto God for this ?
CHAPTER V
Against the Academics^
If a man, says Epictetus, resists truths that are all too evident, in opposing him it is not easy to find an argument by which one may cause him to change
his opinion. The reason for this is neither the
man's ability nor the teacher's weakness ; nay, when
a man who has been trapped in an argument
hardens to stone, how shall one any longer deal
with him by argument ?
was based on the doctrine that nothing could be actually
known. C/. Cicero Acad. I. 45: Arcesilas (a piominent
Academic) negabat esse quidqtiam quod sciri posset . . . sie omnia latere in occuUo : neque esse quidquam qicod cerni aut
intellegi posset : quibus de causis nihil oportere neque profiteri neque adjirmurt quemquam neque adsen»ione approbare, etc. 37
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
3 ^ATro\iO(i}(7ei<; 8^ elal hmai' 77 ^ev rov vorjTiKov
aTTo\i6(i)(TL<;, Tj Se rov ivrpeTrriKOv, orav
Tt9 TrapaT€Tay/j,epo<i y firj iiriveveiv toI<; evapyeai
4 firjS* oLTTO roiv fia)^Ofiev(ov a^iaracrdai, ol he
TToWol Tr)v fiev ccofiaTiKrjv aTroveKprnaiv (fyo^ovp.eda
Kol irdvT civ p^rj^avrjaaifieOa virep tov p,r) irepiirecTelv roioxno) tivl, Trj<; "^vxv^ S' airoveKpov5
p,€VT]<i ovBev ri/JLtv /xeXet. koX vt) Ata eVl avTfj<;
Trj<; '^v')(^ri<i av p,€v rj ouTtw? 8iaK€Lpevo<;, ware
firjBevl ^ TTapaKoXovdelv p,rjhe avi'Levai p,rjBev, kuI
rovTOv KaK(o<; e')(eiv oi6p.eda' av Be rivo<; to ivrpeTTTiKov
Kul alBrjp,ov airoveKpcody, tovto €TI Koi Bvvap.LV KaXovpev.
6 K.aTa\ap^dv€L<i oti iyp^yopa'; ; " ov" (^rjo-iv " ovBe yap, orav ev rot? VTryot? (pavrd^aipai, on
iypyyopa." ovBev ovv Biacfyepet avrrj rj ^avracna
7 iKeivrj<i ; " ovBev." en rovro) BtaXeyopai ; Kal
nrolov avrm irvp rj irolov alBrjpov irpoaaydyoa,
Xv ' aladr]Tai on veveKpcoTai ; aladav6pevo<i ov
8 TTpocTroielrar en. xeipwv eVrt rov veKpov. pd)(r)v
ovro<; ov avvopd' KaKO)^ ^X^'" o'vvopoov ovTO<i ov
9 KLvelrai ovBe TrpoKOTrrer ere ddXiwrepov e'x^ei. €KT€Tp,r]Tat TO alBrjpbov avTOV Kal ivrpeirriKov Kai
TO XoyiKOV ovK d7roT€Tp,T}Tai, aXX' diroreOr)-
10 pioyrai. TavTrjv iyco Bvvapiv eiirco ; prj yevoiro,
el pi) Kal TT)v TOiv KivaiBwv, Kad rjv irdv to
eireKOov ev p,eaa> Kal Trocovai Kal Xeyovcri.
* Salmasius : fj.r)Sfy S. 38
BOOK I. V. 3-IO
Now there are two kinds of petrifaction : one is the petrifaction of the intellect, the other of the
sense of shame, when a man stands in array, prepared
neither to assent to manifest truths nor to leave the
fighting line. Most of us dread the deadening of the
body and would resort to all means so as to avoid
falling into such a state, but about the deadening of
the soul we care not at all. Indeed, by Zeus, even
in the case of the soul itself, if a man be in such a
state that he cannot follow an argument step by step, or even understand one, we regard him too as being
in a bad way ; but if a man's sense of shame and self- respect be deadened, this we go so far as to call strength of character
!
Do your senses tell you that you are awake ? " No," he answers, " any more than they do when
in dreams I have the impression that I am awake."
Is there, then, no ditference between these two
impressions ? " None." Can I argue with this man
any longer ? And what cautery or lancet shall I apply to him, to make him realize that he is deadened ? He does realize it, but pretends that he
does not ; he is even worse than a corpse. One
man does not notice the contradiction—he is in a bad way ; another man notices it, indeed, but is not moved and does not improve—he is in a still worse state. His self-respect and sense of shame
have been lopped off, and his reasoning faculty has
been—I will not say cut away, but brutalized.
Am I to call this strength of character? Far
from it, unless I am so to describe the strength
that lewd fellows have, which enables them to say
and do in public anything that comes into their
heads.
39
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
r'. Tlepl 7rpovoia<:
1 'A0' CKaaTov Tcov iv r& Koafxw yivo/iiivcov
pahtov icTTCv iyKcofiidcrai rrjv irpovoiav, av hvo
^XV '''*'» Tuvra iv eavra>, SvvafiLV re avvopariKrjv
2 T(ov yeyovorcov eKaaro) koI to ev')(^dpiaTov. el he fit], 6 fxev ovK o-^erai rrjv evxP^^lcTTiav rwv
yeyovoTOiV, 6 S' ovk ev^^apiarTjaei eV avrots oiiS 3 av lBt].^ ')(^p(i)paTa 6 ^eo? el ^ TreiroirjKei, hvvap.Lv
he OeariKTjv avroiv fii) TreiroLrjKeL, tL av r/v 4 6(f)e\o<; ; —OyS' otiovv. —'AA-V dvairaXLV el ttjv
fiev Bvvaptv TreTroirjKei, t^ ovra Be p,r] roiavra
Ota VTroTTLTTTeiv rfj Svvdpei rfj opaTiKj}, Kal out(u<? 5 Tt o(^6X,09 ; —0^8' OTIOVV.^—Tt S', et xal dp(f)6-
6 repa ravra ireTTOirjKei, <p(t)<; Be jxr] 7re7ron]K€t
;
—
OliS' ovTtw? Tt 6(f)e\o<;. —Tt9 ovv 6 appLoaa^i tovto
7rpo9 eKelvo KCLKelvo 7rpo<i tovto ; T19 B dppoaa<;
Trjv pd^aipav TTyoo? to KoXeov Kal to Ko\eov 7rpo<i 7 TTJV 7rd)(aipav ; oySet? ; Kal prjv i^ avTrj<; t?}<? KaTaaKevTj'i tcov eTTiTeTeXeap^evcov d7rocf)aivea$at
eldidapLev, otc tc^vltov tlvo<; TrdvTWi to epjov,
ou%t S' cIkt} KaTecTKevaapevov.
8 'Ap' ovv TOVTwv pev CKacrTOv €p(f)alvei tov
rexviTrjv, to, S' opaTo, Kal opaai,<; Kal (^w? ovk
ipi^alvec ; to S' dppev Kal to drjXv Kal 77 Trpodvpiia
rj 7r/3o<f T^r avvovaiav eKaTepov Kal Bvvapi<;
V XPV^'^'-'^h '^^''^ aopioi<; toI<; KaTecrKevaapevoL^
ovBe TavTa ep,(f)aivei tov Tex^^Tijv ; dWd TavTu
10 pev ovTco'* rj Be TOiavTr) t% Biavoia'i KaTUCTKevij,
^ Added by Meiiieke (ei5^ Stobaeus).
* Stobaeus : an erasure in S.
^ Here follows in S an erasure of about 110 letters.
* Stobaeus : omitted by S. 40
BOOK I. VI. i-io
CHAPTER VI
Oj providence
From everything that happens in the universe it is easy for a man to find occasion to praise providence,
if he has within himself these two qualities : the
faculty of taking a comprehensive view of what has
happened in each individual instance, and the sense
of gratitude. Otherwise, one man will not see the
usefulness of what has happened, and another, even
if he does see it, will not be grateful therefor. If God had made colours, but had not made the faculty
of seeing them, of what good had it been ?—None
at all. —But, conversely, if He had made the faculty,
but in making objects, had made them incapable of
falling under the faculty of vision, in that case also
of what good had it been t—None at all.—What
then, if He had even made both of these, but had
not made light?—Even thus it would have been of no use. —Who is it, then, that has fitted this to that
and that to this .' And who is it that has fitted the
sword to the scabbard, and the scabbard to the sword } No one ? Assuredly from the very structure of all made objects we are accustomed to prove that the
work is certainly the product of some artificer, and
ha.s not been constructed at random.
Does, then, every such work reveal its artificer,
but do visible objects and vision and light not reveal
him .'' And the male and the female, and the passion
of each for intercourse with the other, and the faculty
which makes use of the organs which have been constructed
for this purpose, do these things not reveal
their artificer either ? Well, admit it for these things ; but the marvellous constitution of the intellect
41
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
KaB' 7)v ov')(^ aTrXco? viroTriinovTe'i^ toI^ aladij- Tot? Tunovfxeda iiir avro)v, aWa koI eKXa/x^dvofiev
Tt KaX d(f)aipov/ji€v Kal TrpoariOefxev koX
a-vvTiOefxev rciSe riva Sc avrwv koI vj] Ala /Mera-
^aivofxev dir dWcov eV dWa Tivd ^ ovrco ttox;
TrapaKelfieva, ovSe ravra iKavd Kivrjaal Tiva^ kcu
SiaTpe-ilrai 7rpo9 to /i^ dTroXnrelv tov Te-)(yiTriv ; \\ r) e^TjyTjcrdaOaxTav 'qixlv Tt to ttoiovv eariv €Ka-
(XTOV TovTcov rj TToj'i olov TC Tu ouT(o Oav/xaaTU
Kal T€)(viKd eiKfi Kal drro TavTO/ndrov yivecrOai.
12 Tt ovv ; i(f) i)fia)v /xovcov yiveTai ravra ; iroWa
fxev iirl fiovwv, cjv i^aipera)<i ')(^pelav el-yev ro XoytKov ^u>ov, iroWd Be KOivd evprja-ea tj/jllv Kal
13 7r/309 rd akoya. ap ovv Kal rrapaKoXovdel toi^
yivofxevoL<; eKetva ; ovBap.o)';. dXXo yap icrri
•^pijcTL^; Kal dWo 7rapaKo\ovOr]cn<;. eKeivwv
Xpelciv el')(€V o deo^ ^/0&)/i€t'&)i' ral^ (fjavTaa-laif, 14 rjpLUiv he TrapaKoXovOovvTCOv Tfj 'y^pTjaei. Bid
Tovro €K€LV0i'i /jL€v dpKel TO iadieiv Kal irlveLV Kal TO dvairaveadai Kal 6)(€veiv Kal tuXX ocra iiriTeXel tmv avTOiv eKaaTOv, rj/j,lv B\ ol<; Kal
15 Tr)v 7rapaKo\ovdr)TiKr]v Bvvap.iv eBcoKev, ovkcti
raOr' aTrapKcl, aX,X,' dv p,r] KaTa Tpoirov Kal
TCTayp,evci)<; Kal dKoXovdco<; tt) eKaaTOV (f}vaei
Kal KaTacTKevfi -irpaTTcop-ev, ouKeTi tov TeXov<;
16 Tev^ojxeOa tov eavTCOv. oiv ydp al KaTacKCval
17 Bcdcpopoi, TOVTcov Kal Ta epya Kal ra TeXrj. ov
Toivvv T] KaraaKCVT] fiovov ')(pr}(TTiKi], tovto) XPV~
* Meineke : iin-nlirToi'Tfs S.
« Schenkl : rk S. 4a
BOOK I. VI. 10-17
whereby, when we meet with sensible objects, we
do not merely have their forms impressed upon us, but also make a selection from among them, and
subtract and add, and make these various combinations
by using them, yes, and, by Zeus, pass from some
things to certain others which are in a manner
related to them—is not even all this sufficient to
stir our friends and induce them not to leave the
artificer out of account ? Else let them explain to
us what it is that produces each of these results, or how it is possible that objects so wonderful and so workmanlike should come into being at random and
spontaneously.
What then ? Is it in the case of man alone that
these things occur ? You will, indeed, find many
things in man only, things of which the rational animal
had a peculiar need, but you will also find many
possessed by us in common with the irrational animals.
Do they also,then, understand what happens? No! for use is one thing, and understanding another. God
had need of the animals in that thev make use of
external impressions, and of us in that we understand
the use of external impressions. And so for them it
is sufficient to eat and drink and rest and procreate,
and whatever else of the things within their own
province the animals severally do ; while for us, to whom He has made the additional gift of the faculty
of understanding, these things are no longer sufficient,
but unless we act appropriately, and methodically,
and in conformity each with his own nature and
constitution, we shall no longer achieve our own
ends. For of beings whose constitutions are different,
the works and the ends are likewise different. So
for the being whose constitution is adapted to use43
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
a6at otT(a(7ovv airapKer ov he koX napaKoKovdr)-
TLKT) Tj} y^p-qaei, rovrcp ro Kara rpoirov av firj 18 Trpoafj ov8e7roT€ rev^eraL rov TeXov^. ri ovv ; eKcivoiv CKacTTOV KaTacrK€vd^€i ro fiev oxtt
iadUcrdai, ro S' ware virrjperelv et? jecopyiav, ro
8' &JO-T6 rvpov <f)epeiv, ro S' dWo eV dWrj "xpeia
rrapaTrXrjaup, irpo^; a rU XP^^^ '''"^ irapaKoXovOelv
ral^ (^avTaaiai<; kuI ravra<; BiaKpiveiv 8v19
vaaOuL ; rov B dudpcairov dearrjv ela-Tjyayev avrov re koI rSiv epytov ro)v avrov, Kal ov jjlovov 20 dearrjv, dWd KaX i^rjyT]rT}v avrcov. 8id rovro aiaxpov iari r(p dvOpoarrti) dpx'^o^dai koX KuraXi'jyeiv
OTTov koI rd dXoya, dXXd /xdXXov evOev
fiev apx^crOai, KaraXijyetv Se e'^' o KareXrj^ev i(f>' 21 rjficiyp Kal rj <pv(ri<;. KareXrj^ev 8' eVl Oecopiai'
Kal Trapa/coXovdrjaiv Kal avfKpcovov Sie^ayeoyrjv
22 rfj (f)v(T€i. opdre ovv, jjlt} ddearoi rovroav drroOdv7)re.
23 'Aw* eh ^OXvfiTTLav fiev dTToSrjfjuelre, iv iSrjre ^ ro epyov rov ^etSiov, Kal drv^VI^^ eKacrro<i vjjlwv 24 oterat ro dviaroprjro'; rovrcov drrodavelv ottov 8' ov8^ diToB'qpLrjcraL ^/oe/a earlv, dXX! eariv ijSrj Kal
irdpecmv rot? epyoL<i, ravra he OedcracrOat xal
26 Karavorjaai ovk eiri6vpii](Tere ; ovk aladrjaeade
roivvv, ovre rcva eare ovr iirl ri yeyovare ovre
ri rovro eariv, e<f)^ ov rr)v Oeav irapeoXTjcpde ; —
26 'A\Xa yiverai rcva drjBi] Kal ;^aA,e7ra ev ra> ^i(p. —^EiV 'OXvfjLTria 8' ov ylverat ; ov Kavp,ari^eaOe
; ov crrevoxdopelade ; ov KaKci)<; Xovecrde ;
* Schweighauser : €j55}t« S. 44
BOOK I. VI. 17-26
only, mere use is sufficient, but where a being has
also the faculty of understanding the use, unless the
principle of propriety be added, he will never attain
his end. What then ? Each of the animals God constitutes,
one to be eaten, another to serve in farming,
another to produce cheese, and yet another for some
other similar use ; to perform these functions what
need have they to understand external impressions
and to be able to differentiate between them ? But
God has brought man into the world to be a spectator
of Himself and of His works, and not merely a
spectator, but also an interpreter. Wherefore, it is shameful for man to begin and end just where the
irrational animals do ; he should rather begin where
they do, but end where nature has ended in dealing
with us. Now she did not end until she reached
contemplation and underst^mding and a manner of
life harmonious with nature. Take heed, therefore,
lest you die without ever having been spectators of
these things.
But you travel to Olympia to behold the work ^ of
Pheidias, and each of you regards it as a misfortune to die without seeing such sights ; yet when there is no
need to travel at all, but where Zeus is already, and
is present in his works, will you not yearn to behold
these works and know them ? Will you decline,
therefore, to perceive either who you are, or for what
you have been bom, or what that purpose is for which you have received sight?—But some unpleasant
and hard things happen in life. —And do
they not happen at Olympia ? Do you not swelter ? Are you not cramped and crowded f Do you not
* The famous gold and ivory statue of Zeus. 45
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ov KaTa^pej(^£ad€, otuv ^p^XV > dopv^ov Se kol
^ofjq Kol Twv dWcov ^a\€7r(t)v ovk airokaveTe ; 27 aX)C olfiai on ravra iravra avri,ri6evre<i irpof; 28 TO d^ioXoyov tj}? dea^ (pipere koI avexj^ade. dye
Bvvd/j,€i^ 8' OVK el\rj(paTe, Kad^ a^ otaere ttclv ro
(Tv/M^atvov ; fxeyaXoyjrvxiciv ovk etX-T/^are ; dv29
Bpeiav ovk elX7](f)aT€ ; Kaprepi'av ovk elXijcpare ; Koi Ti en fxot fxeXei fieyaXo-yJrvxo} ovn rwv diro-
^rjvai Svva/Ji€V(JOV ; ti fi iKcrrriaeL rj Tupd^et r) rl
oSuvrjpov (fyavelrac ; ov ^PV^o/xai ttj Svvd/xei
7rp6<i a etXrjipa avrrjv, a\V eVi rot? diro^aivovaiv
7r€v6j](TQ} Kal arevd^co ; 30 " Nat* dXX al fiv^at /xov peovacv." rivof; ovv
€V€Ka %e?/9a? ^xet?, avSpdiroSov ; ov^ '^va kol
31 diT0[jiva(TT)<i creavTov ; —Tovro ovv evXoyov /xy^a?
32 yiveadai iv r^ Koir/xq) ; —Kal iroaw KpetTTov
. dirofJiv^aaOai ae r) iyKoXelv ; rj ri ocec on 6 HpaKXri<i dv dTrejSr], el firj Xecov TOiovTo<i eyevero
Kol vBpa Kal eXa(f)o<; koI (tO? Kal d8,iKoc nve<;
dvOpwnot Kal drjpico8€i<;, ov<; eKelvo<i i^rjXavvev
33 Kal eKudaipev ; Kal tI dv eVotet firjBev6<i toiov- rov yeyov6ro<; ; rj hrjXov on evrervXiypbevo'i dv
eKadevhev ; ovkovv irpoyrov fjuev ovk dv eyevero
Hpa/icA,?}? iv Tpvcj>fi TOLavrt) Kal 'qav^ia vvaTa^cov
oXov rov ^iov el S' dpa Kal iyevero, rl 6(peXo^
34 avTOV ; Ti9 Se xprjcri,'^ rSiv ^pa^iovcov tcov eKei- vov Kal T?79 dXXr]<i aX/e?}? Kal Kaprepia^ Kal
yevvaioTTjTO^, el p,r) ToiavTal Tive<i avrov trepi- 36 (ndaei^ Kal vXai Sieaeiaav Kal eyvjxvaaav ; ri
46
BOOK I. VI. 26-35
bathe with discomfort ? Are you not drenched whenever
it rains ? Do you not have your fill of tumult
and shouting and other annoyances ? But I fancy
that you hear and endure all this by balancing it off against the memorable character of the spectacle.
Come, have you not received faculties that enable
you to bear whatever happens ? Have you not
received magnanimity ? Have you not received
courage ? Have you not received endurance ? And
what care I longer for anything that may happen, if
I be magnanimous ? What shall perturb me, or trouble me, or seem grievous to me ? Shall I fail to use my faculty to that end for which I have received
it, but grieve and lament over events that occur ? " Yes, but my nose is running." What have you
hands for, then, slave ? Is it not that you may wipe
your nose ? " Is it reasonable, then, that there should
be running noses in the world ? " —And how much
better it would be for you to wipe your nose than to
find fault I Or what do you think Heracles would
have amounted to, if there had not been a lion like
the one which he encountered, and a hydra, and a
stag, and a boar, and wicked and brutal men, whom
he made it his business to drive out and clear away ? And what would he have been doing had nothing of
the sort existed ? Is it not clear that he would have
rolled himself up in a blanket and slept ? In the first place, then, he would never have become Heracles by
slumbering away his whole life in such luxury and
ease ; but even if he had, of what good would he
have been ? What would have been the use of those arms of his and of his prowess in general, and his steadfastness and nobility, had not such circumstances
and occasions roused and exercised him .'' What
47
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovv ; avrG> ravTa<i eBet Karaa-Kevd^eiv kclI ^rjrecv TToOev XeovTU elaayayelv et? rrjv ')^(opav ttjv 36 avTov Koi (Tvv KoX vSpav ; ficopla tovto koI
fxavia. yevofieva Se koI evpeOevra ev-x^prjcrra tfv irpo'i TO Bel^ai koI yvp^vdcrai top 'Hpa/cXea.
37 "Aye ovv Kal crv tovtcov alaOofievo^ diro^Xe^ov
€l<i ra<; Svvdfiei^ a? €-)(€c<; Kal aTriSatv elire " <f>€pe
vvv, oi Tied, rjv Oe\ei<i irepicnacnv' e')(a) yap
•napacTKevrjv e/c <jov p,oi Sehop^evrjv xal d<f>opp.a<;
irpo'; TO Koap,ri<Tai 8ia t(ov diro^aivovTWV ifiav38
rov." ov' dWa Kddrjade to. fiev fir) av/nfifj Tpe-
/iOVT€9, T(ov Be avp,^aiv6vTcov 68vp6p,evoc Kal
TrevdovvTe'i Kal aTevovTe<i' etTa TOi<? Oeol<; iyKa39
Xetre. Tt yap icrTiv dWo aKoXovOov Ty ToiavTj)
40 dyevveia fj Kal dai^eia ; KaiToi 6 ye 0eo<i ov
fiovov eScoKev rjp,iv ra? 8vvdp,ei,<i TavTa<i, Kad* a?
' OLcrop>ev ttclv to aTro/Salvov p,r} Tairetvov/xevot, firjSe
(TvyK\(op.evoL utt' avTOv, aW' o ^v dyadov ^aai-
\eco<i Kal Tai<; d\7)deiai<i TvaTpo^, aKtoXvTov tovto
ehwKev, dvavdyKacTov, aTrapaTrohiaTov, oXov
avTO e^' Tip,lv eTToirjcrev ov8' auTa> Tiva 7r/309 TOVTO ia'Xyv diroXnreou, oiaTS KcoXvcrai rj ep^iro41
Biaai. TavTa exovT€<; eXevOepa Kal vp,eTepa /xt)
')(^prjarde avTol<; firjS^ alcrddveade Tiva el\t'](^aTe 42 Kal irapd Tivo<i, dWd Kddrjade 7revdovvTe<; Kal
<jTevovTe<i ol p,ev tt/do? avTov tov BovTa diroTeTV(p\u>p.€voi
/jirjS' iirtyivaxTKOVTe^ tov evepyeTtjV,
ol 8' VTT dyevveia^ eh p,ep.yfr€i<i Kal to, iyKXij/xaTa
43 TG) Oeo) eKTpenop'evot. KaLTOt, 7rpo9 fieyaXo^jrv48
BOOK I. VI. 35-43
then ? Ought he to have prepared these for himself, and sought to bring a lion into his own
country from somewhere or other, and a boar, and a hydra ? This would have been folly and madness.
But since they did exist and were found in the
world, they were serviceable as a means of revealing
and exercising our Heracles.
Come then, do you also, now that you are aware
of these things, contemplate the faculties which you
have, and, after contemplating, say : " Bring now,
O Zeus, what difficulty Thou wilt ; for I have an equipment given to me by Thee, and resources wherewith to distinguish myself by making use of
the things that come to pass," But no, you sit trembling for fear something will happen, and
lamenting, and grieving, and groaning about other
things that are happening. And then you blame
the gods I For what else can be the consequence
of so ignoble a spirit but sheer impiety ? And yet
God has not merely given us these faculties, to enable us to bear all that happens without being
degraded or crushed thereby, but—as became a good
king and in very truth a father—He has given them
to us free from all restraint, compulsion, hindrance ; He has put the whole matter under our control
without reserving even for Himself any power to prevent or hinder. Although you have these faculties
free and entirely your own, you do not use them, nor do you realize what gifts you have received,
and from whom, but you sit sorrowing and groaning, some of you blinded toward the giver himself and
not even acknowledging your benefactor, and others, —such is their ignoble spirit—turning aside to
fault-finding and complaints against God. And yet,
49
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
^j^taf fjLev Kot avSpeiav iyco trot Sei^M on d(f)opiJ,a<i
Kal 7rapa(7K€vr)v €')(eL<i, 7rp6<i Se to fjt,€/j,(f)€cr0ai koI
iyKaXelv iroia'i d(f}opfia<; e^j^ei? ai) S' ifiol BcLKwe.
^'. Hepi T^9 'X^peta^ rwv fieraTrnrrovToov Kal
vTToderLKwv Kal rSiv opuoicov
1 'H irepX TOL"? pL6Ta'iri'iTrovra<i Kal VTroderiKovSy
en 8e rq> -qprnrrjadai irepaivovTa'i Kal 7rdvTa<; aTrXto? roi)^ roiovrov^ Xoyov^ Trpayfiareia \avddvei
rov<i ttoXXou? irepl KadrjKovTO<i ouaa.
2 ^i]TOvp,€v yap iirl Trdar)'; v\rj<; ttw? dv evpoi ^ KaXo<; Kal dyado^ t^'jv hie^ohov Kal dvacrrpo(f)T]v
3 TT]v iv avTTJ Ka6r]K0V(Tav. ovkovv rj tovto XeyeTtocrav,
on ov avyKadijcrei ei? epcorrjcriv Kal
diroKpiaiv o airovhalo^; rj on avyKadel<i ovk
eTTifjueXijaeTai rov fir) eiKfj /jLtjS' 009 erv^ev iv
4 ip(OTT](T€L Kal d-jTOKpLaei dvaaTpecpeadaL, rj ^ tovTwv
p^rjSeTepov '7rpoahe')(^op,evoi<i dvayKalov opioXoyelu,
on iirlcxKe'^lv riva TroirjTeov roiv Totrwv
rovroiv, trepl ov<i pudXiaTa cnpe^CTai epQiTrjcn<;
Kal dtroKpiai^.
5 Ti yap iirayyeXXerai iv Xoym ; rdXrjOr] n-
^ Meibom : tvpooi S.
2 Schenkl : nh S.
^ With the Stoics, whose sole standard of judgement in problems of conduct was the appeal to reason, the proper
training of the reasoning faculties was an indispensable pre- requisite to the good life. Three modes of sophistical
reasoning are here differentiated. " Equivocal premisses " SO
BOOK I. VI. 43-vii. 5 though I can show you that you have resources and
endowment for magnanimity and courage, do you,
pray, show me what resources you have to iustify
faultfinding and complaining
!
CHAPTER VII
Of the use of equivocal premisses, hypothetical
arguments and the like Most men are unaware that the handling of arguments
which involve equivocal and hypothetical premisses,
and, further, of those which derive syllogisms
by the process of interrogation, and, in general, the
handling of all such arguments,^ has a bearing upon
the duties of life. For our aim in every matter of
inquiry is to learn how the good and excellent man
may find the appropriate course through it and the
appropriate way of conducting himself in it. Let them
say, then, either that the good man will not enter
the contest of question and answer, or that, once he
has entered, he will be at no pains to avoid con- ducting himself carelessly and at haphazard in question and answer ; or else, if they accept neither
of these alternatives, they must admit that some
investigation should be made of those topics with
which question and answer are principally concerned.
For what is the professed object of reasoning?
{fLera-w'tTToyra xiyoi) are those that contain ambiguities
in terms which are intended to mean one thing at one step
in the argument, another at another. " Hj-p«thetical pre- misses " involve assumptions, or conditions. The last class proceeds by drawing unexpected conclusions from the answ ers to questions. 51
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Oevai, TO, ylrevSi] aipeiv, 7r/>o9 ^ to, dSijXa cTrex^iv.
6 ap ovv dpK€i TOVTo fXQvov fiadelv ; —'Ayo/cet,
(fiTjaiv. —OvKOVv KoX TO) ^ovXofievo} iv ')(^pj]a€i vofiia/iiaTo^ fir] SiaTTLTTTeiv apK€i tovto aKovaai,
Sia Tt Ta9 /xev 8o/ci,fMov<; Spa^/xaf TrapaSexiJ, '^^'* 7 S' dSoKCfiovi d7ro8oKifid^€L<i ;
—
Ouk dpKel.—Tt
ovv 8el Tovrw irpoaXa^elv ; Tt fydp aXKo rj Bvvafj.iv BoKifiacTTiKTjv Te koI StaxptTCKrjv twv
8 hoKLfiwv re koX dSoKifiayv Spa^/JLMV ; oukovv kuI
iirl \6yov ovk dpKel to \€)(^6€v, dXX' dvdy/cr]
SoKifiaariKov yeveadat koI BcaKptriKov rov dXr}-
9 dov'i Ka\ Tov \lr€v8ov<; xal rov dB)]\ov ;—'AvdyKij. —'EttI TouTot? Tt irapayyeWerai iv \6yqi ; ro aKoXovdov Tot9 hodelaiv vtto aov KaX(o<; irapahe10
Xov. dye dpxel ovv KuvravOa yvcavai rovro ; OVK dpKCi, Set Be fiadelv irco'i ri riaiv dKoXovdov
yiverai koI irore fiev ev evl dKoXovOel, irore Be
11 TrXeioaiv KOivfj. firj irore ovv koL rovro dvdyKTj
TrpocrXa^eiv rov fieXXovra iv Xoyai avverco'i
dvaarpacfyrjaea-Oat Koi avrov r diToBeL^eiv exaara
diToBovra koL roi^ drroBeLKvvovcri irapaKoXovdrjcreiv
firjB^ vtto rwv ao(pc^o/J,€V(ov BiaTrXavrj12
drjaeadai, a)<; d-TToBeiKWovrcav ; ovkovv eXrfkvdev
Tjfilv irepl rcov awayovrcov Xoyoov koI rpoTrcov
Trpayfiareia koI yvfivaaia koi diajKoLa 7re(f}r]vev- 13 'AXXa Bt) earIV e^' ci)v BeBcoKUfiev vytat^ ra
^ Added by Meibom.
52
BOOK I. VII. 5-13
To state the true, to eliminate the false, to suspend
judgement in doubtful cases. Is it enough, then,
to learn this alone .'-—It is enough, says one. —Is it, then, also enough for the man who wants to make
no mistake in the use of money to be told the
reason why you accept genuine drachmas and reject
the counterfeit ?—It is not enough.—What, then,
must be added to this .'' Why, what else but the
faculty that tests the genuine drachmas and the
counterfeit and distinguishes between them } Wherefore,
in reasoning also the spoken word is not enough,
is it? On the contrary, is it not necessary to develop the power of testing the true and the false and the uncertain and of distinguishing between
them r —It is necessary. —W'hat else besides this is proposed in reasoning ? Pray accept the conse- quence of what you have properly granted. Come,
is it enough, then, in this case also merely to know
that this particular thing is true .' It is not enough,
but one must learn in what way a thing follows as a consequence upon certain other things, and how
sometimes one thing follows upon one, and at other
times upon several conjointly. Is it not, then, necessary
that a man should also acquire this power, if he is to acquit himself intelligently in argument,
and is himself not only to prove each point when he
tries to prove it, but also to follow the argument of
those who are conducting a proof, and is not to be
misled by men who quibble as though they were
proving something? There has consequently arisen
among us, and shown itself to be necessary, a science
which deals with inferential arguments and with
logical figures and trains men therein.
But of course there are times when we have
S3
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
XtjfifiaTa KoX crvfi^alveL tovtI i^ avrcav "^^evhof; 14 he ov ovhev rjTTov avfi^aivec. ri ovv fioi Ka15
drjK€i TToielv ; TrpoaBe^eadat to >//'€0So9 ; Kal
TTW? olov T ; ak\a \eyetv on " ovt^ v<yLS)<i Trap€)(^copr]a-a to, oi/xoXoyij/Meva "
; /cal fir)v ovSe
TOVTO 8i8oTai. a\V on " ov av/ju^atveL Sia tmv
7rapaKe)(^copr]/j,€V(ov " ; aX)C ovBe touto SlBoTac.
16 Tt ovv eVt TovTcov TroirjTeov ; rj fii] irore &)? ovk
dpK€i TO SaveCaaadai Trpo? to en 6<^ei\etv, oKXa
Bet Trpocrelvai koI to eiriixeveiv eiri tov Baveiov
KoX fxri BiaXeXvadat avjo, ovtw; ovk apKel irpo^;
to Beiv 'jTapa')(^wpelv to eTTicpepofievov to BeBcoKevai
TCL XijfifiaTa, Bel 8' eTrifieveip iirl t:^9 irapa17
)(^cop7]ae(o<; avTcov ; Koi Br} fxevovrcov fxev avT(ov
eh T€Xo<i OTTOia Trape-^wprjdri iracra avdyKt) rj/jbd<; eVl tt}? 7ra/?a;^&)/)r;(Te&)? eTTifievetv kuI to clko- 19 \ovdov avToh irpoaBkyeadai'^ . . . ovBeyap rjpZv
€Ti ovBe Kaff' rj/xd<; crvfi^alvec tovto to €7ncf)ep6/J,€- vov, eTTeiBr) Trj<i (rvy')(Oiprjaeoi<; twv XrjfifidTcov 20 dtrecTTrinev. Bel ovv koX tu toluvtu to)v Xrjfifid- Ttav iaTopr)(Tai Kal tyjv TOtavrijv fxeTu^oX-qv t€
Kot /jLeTdTTTcoaiv avTOiv, KaS" 7]v iv avTfj tjj
epcoT^(7€i rj Trj diroKpiaei. rj tS) avWeXoytadac
rj Tivi aXA-ft) toiovtw \ap,/3dvovTa Ta? fiCTa-
^ At this point Upton introduced from his ' codex ' a
sentence intended to express fully the transition in the argument (§ 18) : /x)) h(v6vt(iiv Si avrwv birola irapex'^ph^V, tai
fifjias Tracra avdyiir] Trjs Trapax<^p'i]0'^'>'S a<pi(rracrdat Kal yrov Schw.^
rh a.vaK6KovQov avrols \6yots irpocrhex.^crOai. " If, however,
they do not remain as they were granted, we are also bound
to abandon our concession and our acceptance of what is 54
BOOK I. VII. 13-20
with sound reasoning granted the premisses, and
the inference from them is so-and-so ; and, in spite
of its being false, it is none the less the inference.
What, then, should I do .- Accept the fallacy ? And how is that possible ? Well, should I say, " It was not sound reasoning for me to grant the premisses"?
Nay, but this is not permissible either. Or, "This does not follow from what has been
granted " ? But that is not permissible, either. What, then, must be done in these circumstances ? Is it not this, that the fact of having borrowed is not enough to prove that one is still in debt, but we
must add the circumstance that one abides by the
loan—that is, has not paid it —and just so our having once granted the premisses is not enough to compel
us to accept the inference, but we must abide by our acceptance of the premisses ? And what is more,
if the premisses remain until the end what they were when they were granted, there is every necessity
for us to abide by our acceptance of them, and
to allow the conclusion that has been drawn from
them ; . . . for from our point of view and to our way
of thinking this inference does not now result from
the premisses, since we have withdrawn from our
previous assent to the premisses. It is necessary,
therefore, to enquire into premisses of this kind and
into such change and equivocal modification of them,
whereby, at the very moment the question is put, or the answer made, or the deduction drawn, or at some other similar stage in the argument, the premisses
take on modified meanings and give occasion
inconsistent with the premisses." Schenkl indicates a lacunv
55
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TTTCoaet^ a(^opfir]v Trape^ec roi'i avorjToi^; rod
Tapda-aecrOat /xr) ^Xeirovai, to ukoXovOov. tivo^; 21 €V€Ka ; Iv* iv tw r6iTa> rovrw firj irapa to
KodrJKov fiTjS^ elKfi firjSe a'V'yK€'^v/j,6VQ}<i avaarpecfxofieda.
22 Kat TO avTo iirl re rwv inroOecreaiv koX rS)v
vTToOeriK&v Xoycov. avayKalov yap ecrrcp or
alrrjaai riva virodecriv warrep iiri^dOpav ra> i^rj<i 23 \6y<p. nrdcrav ovv rrjv Sodelaav irapa^coprjreov
24 ^ oil iraaav ; Kot el ov Trdcrav, riva ; ^ irapaX(^PV^civri
8k fxevereov el<i dirav eVl t?;?
Ti]pr)a6U)^ rj eariv ore aTroarareov, rd 8' aKoXovda
irpoaheKreov fcal rd p-a^ofxeva ov irpoaheKreov ; —
26 Nat.—AWa Xeyei ri<; on " iroLrjcra) ae Svvarov
Se^dp^vov VTToOecrip eir dhvvarov d'jTa')(drjvaL"
7rp6<; rovTov ov avyKadrjcret 6 c^povLp.O'i, dXXd
26 <f)€v^erai e^eraaiv xal KoivoXoyCav ; Kal Tt? en
aXXof ecrrl Xoyq) ')(p7)(rTiKo^ Kal 8etv6<; epcorijaei
Kal aTTOKpicrei Kal vrj Ala dve^aTrdrijr6<i re Kal
27 da-o<f>iaro^ ; dXXd avyKaOrjaei pAv, ovk eiri- arpa^rjaerai, he rov p,T) ecK'p Kal &)9 ervj^ev
dvacrrpe(f)€crdai ev Xoya ; Kal tto)? ert. ecrrai 28 roiovro<i olov avrov eirivoovpiev ; dXX^ dvev rtvo<;
roiavrrj<; yvp,vaala^ Kal irapacrKevrj^ (pvXdrreiv
29 ol6<; t' earl to €^7j<; ; rovro SeiKvvrtoaav Kal
•napiXKei rd OeoDprjpuara ravra irdvra, droira
rjv Kal dvaKoXovda rfj irpoXTjyfrei, rov ajrovBaiov,
30 Tt en dpyol Kal pddvpoi koI vondpoi eap^v
^ The words irepi rivos v CKfypts ; irfpt Ka6-fiKouToi at this point were deleted by Wolf.
56
BOOK I. VII. 20-30
to the unthinking to be disconcerted, if they do not
see what follows in consequence. Why is it necessary
.' In order that in this matter we may not
behave unsuitably, nor at haphazard, nor confusedly.
And the same holds true of hypotheses and hypothetical
arguments. For it is necessary at times to postulate some hypothesis as a sort of stepping-stone
for the subsequent argument. Are we, therefore, to grant any and every hypothesis that is proposed, or not every one ? And if not every one, what one ? And when a man has granted an hyjwthesis, must he
abide for ever by it and maintain it, or are there
times when he should abandon it and accept only
the consequences which follow from it without accepting
those which are opposed to it ? —Yes. —But some- one says, " If you once admit an hypothesis that
involves a possibility, I will compel you to be drawn
on to an impossibility." Shall the prudent man
refuse to engage with this person, and avoid enquir}'
and discussion with him ? Yet who but the prudent
is capable of using argument and skilful in question and answer, and, by Zeus, proof against
deceit and sophistic fallacies? But shall he argue,
indeed, and then not take pains to avoid conducting
himself recklessly and at haphazard in argument ? And if he does not, how will he any longer be the
sort of man we think he is ? But without some such
exercise and preparation in formal reasoning, how
will he be able to maintain the continuity of the
argument ? Let them show that he will be able,
and all these speculations become mere superfluity;
they were absurd and inconsistent with our preconception
of the good man. Why are we still indolent and easy-going and
VOL. I. D 57
ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Kai 7rpo(f)daei^ ^rjTOVfiev, Kad^ a? ov irovrjcrofiev
ovS" dypv7rvi](ro/xev i^epya^ofxevoi rov avrav ^ 31 \oyov
;
— Kv ovv iv tovtol<; irXav-qdw, fxri ri rov irarepa dneKTeiva ; —^ Kvhpdirohov, ttov yap
evOdhe TTUTTjp rfv, Xv aurov d7roKT€ivr]<i ; ri ovv
i7roi,r](Ta<i ; o p,ovov rjv Kara rov roTTov d/judprrjfia, 32 rovro '^/xdprrjKa^. iirei rot rovr avrb Koi iyoo
Pov(f>q) eiTTOv eTTircfitovrl fioc on ro TrapaXeiTTOfievov
€v €v (TvWoyiafiq) rivc ov^ evpiaKov, " OvX olov yCtev," (f>r)/jii, " el ^ to KaTTLrcoXiov KareKavcra,"
^08'" ^AvSpd-rroSov" €<f>r), " ivddhe ro
33 irapaXetTTo/jLevov K.a7nr(i)Xi6v iarcv." rj ravra
/jiova dfiaprrjixard cart ro K^airircoXiov ipLirprjaaL
Kol rov rrarepa dTroKreivac, ro 8' elKj} xal /xdrrjv
Koi ft)9 ervxev XPW^^'' '''"*? (pavraaiai^ rat? avrov Kol fjurj irapaKoXovOelv Xoyw p,rj8^ ciTroBet^ei
firjSe ao(f)l,<Tfiarc fMrjb' dirXco^ ^XeTreiv ro xaO
avrov Kal ov Kad^ avrov ev ipcortja-ei Kal diro.
Kpiaei, rovrmv S' ovSiv iariv dpLdprrjfia ;
77'. "On al Svvdfiet^ rot? dTrai8€vroi<i ovk
d(T(f)aXei^
1 Ka^' 6(T0V<; rpoirov^ fieraXa/ju^dveiv ecrn rd
ItTohvvapLOvvra dXXrfXoi<i, Kara roaovrov<i Kal
rd eiBrj rcov eTrtx^tprj/xdrayv re Kal ev6up,T}p,drQ)V
2 iv rol^ X6yoi<; eKiroiel fieraXafi^dvetv. olov (f)€pe
58
* Salmasius : avrhu S. * Added by Blass.
' Schenkl : KarevKfiaa-a S.
BOOK I. VII. 30-viii. 2
sluggish, seeking excuses whereby we may avoid
toiling or even late hours, as we try to perfect our own reason ?—If, then, I err in these matters, I have
not murdered my own father, have I?—Slave, pray
where was there in this case a father for you to murder ? What, then, have you done, you ask ? You have committed what was the only possible
error in the matter. Indeed this is the very remark
I made to Rufus when he censured me for not dis- covering the one omission in a certain syllogism.
"Well," said 1, "it isn't as bad as if I had burned
down the Capitol." But he answered, " Slave, the
omission here is the Capitol." Or are there no other
errors than setting fire to the Capitol and murdering
one's father? But to make a reckless and foolish and haphazard use of the external impressions that
come to one, to fail to follow an argument, or demonstration,
or sophism—in a word, to fail to see in question and answer what is consistent with one's
position or inconsistent—is none of these things an
error ? CHAPTER VIII
That the reasoning faculties, in the case oj the uneducated, are not free from error In as many ways as it is jjossible to vary the meaning
of equivalent terms, in so many ways may a man
also vary the forms of his controversial arguments
and of his enthymemes ^ in reasoning. Take this
^ An enthymeme is defined by Aristotle {Rhet. 1. i. 11) as "a rhetorical demonstration," that is, an argument expressed
in ordinary literary style, not in the formal fashion of a
syllogism. It is thus called an "incomplete syllogism" (§ 3
below), as falling short of the "definite proof" accorded by
the syllogism.
59
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Tov rpOTTOV TOVTOV €1 ihaveKTO) Koi fir) a7reB(i)Ka<i,
o0etXet9 /J-oi TO apyvpiov ov^l ihaveiaco fiev Koi
ovK uTre^coKa^' ov firjv 6<f}eL\ec<i fioi to apyvpioi'.
3 Kal TovTo oiiSevl fidWov irpoariKeL rj rw (^l\o(t6(^w
e^Tretpcy? Troielv. ecTrep yap dTe\r/<j avXX.oyicr/x6<;
ecTTt TO ivOvfiijfia, 8t]\ov on 6 irepl rov reXetov
avWoyta/jLov yeyu/xvaafMevo^ ovto<; ai> lKavo<i eirj Kal irepl tov dreXi] ovSev rfrrov,
4 Tt TTOT ovv ov yu/jivd^ofiev avrov<; re Kal
5 aX\i]\ov^ rov rpoirov tovtov ; on vvv Kairoi fxrj yufiva^6/j.evoi irepl raina firjB^ dirb tt]<; t'Trt/ieXeta? ToD rjdov<i vTTo ye ifiov TrepKTTriOfxevoc 6fjL(o<; 6 ovBev eTTiBiBofiev eh KoXoKayadiav . ri ovv XPh
TrpoaSoKav, el Kal ravTTjv ttjv da^oXiav irpoaXd-
^oi/xev ; Kal (xd\icr9\ on ov fiovov d(7y(^o\ia Tt? aTTo Twv dvayKaiOTepojv avrrj irpoayevoiT dv,
dXkd Kal oltjaeo)^ d(f)opp.T} Kal rv^ov ou^ r) 7 Tu^ouo-a. fieydXrj ydp icrn hvva[xi<; rj ein-
'^eiprjTi.KT} Kal TriOavoXoyiKij, Kai fidXiar' el tv^oi
yvfivaaia^ eTrnrXeov Kai Tiva Kal evirpeiretav dirh
8 Twv ovofidrcov irpocrXd^ot. oti Kal iv tm KaOoXov
irdaa 8vva/j,i<i eTria(f)aXrf^ toZ? dTraiBevroi^ Kal
dadeveat irpoayevoiievr) Trpo? to eirdpai Kal
9 '^(avvSiaai eV avrfj. Troia ydp dv n<; en fn])(^avfj
ireicrai, rov veov rov ev TouTot? hiatpepovra, on
ov hel Trpoa0>]KT]v avrov eKelvoiv yeveaOat, dXX^
10 eKclva avrM irpoadelvai ; ov)(l 8e Trdvra^ rov^
Xoyov^ rovTov<i KaraTTarrj(Ta<i i7n]pp.evo<i rj/xlv Kai
'ire(f)va'r]/j,evo<i TrepiTrarel /J.r)B^ dvexop£vo<i, av n<i
dirTrjrai ^ avrov VTToixifivrjaKwv, rivo<i drroXeXetfifxevo^
nov diroKeKXiKev ;
' Tj after iirvrirai deleted in s. 6o
BOOK I. VIII, 2-IO
syllogism, for instance : Ifyou have borrowed and have
not repaid, you owe me the money ; noiv you have not boiTowed aiid have not repaid ; therefore you do not owe me the money. And no man is better fitted to employ
such variations skilfully than the ])hilosopher. For
if^ indeed, the enth}Tiieme is an incomplete syllogism,
it is clear that he who has been exercised in the
perfect syllogism would be no less competent to deal with the imperfect also. Why, then, do we neglect to exercise ourselves
and one another m this way ? Because, even now,
without receiving exercise in these matters, or even
being, by me at least, diverted from the study of
morality, we nevertheless make no progress toward
the beautiful and the good. What, therefore, must
we expect, if we should take on this occupation
also } And especially since it w ould not merely be
an additional occupation to draw us away from those
which are more necessary, but would also be an
exceptional excuse for conceit and vanity. For great
is the power of argumentation and persuasive reasoning,
and especially if it should enjoy excessive exercise
and receive likewise a certain additional ornament
from language. The reason is that, in general, every
faculty which is acquired by the uneducated and the
weak is dangerous for them, as being apt to make
tliem conceited and puffed up over it. For by what
device might one any longer persuade a young man
who excels in these faculties to make them an appendage to himself instead of his becoming an appendage to them ? Does he not trample all these
reasons under foot, and strut about in our presence,
all conceited and puffed up, much less submitting if any one by way of reproof reminds him of what he
lacks and wherein he has gone astray ? 6i
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
11 Tt ovv ; HXdrcov ^ckoaoc^o^ ovk rjv ; 'Itttto- Kparrj^ yap larpof ovk Tjv ; aX)C 6pa<i ttSx; 12 <f>pd^€i lTnroKpdTr)<;. ixrj n ovv 'l7nroKpdTr)<i ovtco
(ppd^ei, Kado larp6<; ea-riv ; tl ovv fityvveiii irpdyfiara
aWtu? eVi tS>v uvtmv dvdp(t>rra)v avvBpa13
fjiovra ; el Se koKos r)v YlXdrwv Koi laxvpo'i, eSei
Kdp,e KaOtjfxevov eKTTOveiv, iva KaK6<i yevoop^ai r) iva t,a)(^vpo<i, (i? tovto dvay/calov 7rp6<; <f)cko-
<TO(f)Lav, €TT€i Tt9 <f)iX6cro(f>o<i dfia Kal KaXo<; rjv koX
14 <fiiXoao(f)o<i ; ov 8e\ei<{ aladdveadai Koi ScuKplvaL
Kara n oi dvdpcoirot yivovrai (f>iX6ao(f)oi Kal riva
aXXa)<i avToi'i Trdpecmv ; aye el S" iyco (f)iX6ao(f>o<;
ijfirjv, eSei vfid<i Kal )(^coXov<i yeveadai ; ri ovv ; 15 aXpw ^ Ta9 Bvvdfiei^ rauTa? ; fir/ yivoiTO' ovSe
16 yap rrjv opariKi]v. o/itw? 8\ dv p,ov irvvddvr) rl
ecTTLV dyadov rov dvdpocnrov, ovk e)(U) aoc dXXo
eiTrecv rj on Troid Trpoaipeai';.^
&. W(ii<i diro rov (Tvyyeve2<: r)p,d<i eivat rw dew
erreXdoL dv xi? eVt rd i^rj^ ;
1 Et ravrd eariv dXrjOf] ra Trepl t?}? crvyyeveia<i
Tov deov Kal dvOpcoTrayv Xeyofieva viro twv ^lXo-
(To^wv, ri dXXo diroXeiTTerai rot? dvOpco7roi,<; rj TO TOV 'Z(i)KpdTov<;, p/qhe-TroTe Trp6<; tov irvdop-evov
TTohaiTo'i ecFTLV eiTTeiv otc ' AdT}valo<; rj K.opiv9io<;,
2 dXX^ oTi Koapio^; ; 8id tl yap Xeyei^ ^AOr]vaiov
1 SchenkI : ipS> S.
' (pavraaiSiv after irpoatpfffis deleted by SchenkI. 62
BOOK I. VIII. ii-ix. 2 What then? Was not Plato a philosopher? Yes,
and was not Hippocrates a physician ? But you see how eloquently Hippocrates expresses himself. Does
Hipf)ocrates, then, express himself so eloquently by
virtue of his being a physician ? Why, then, do you
confuse things that for no particular reason have
been combined in the same man ? Now if Plato was handsome and strong, ought I to sit down and strive to become handsome, or become strong, on the
assumption thgit this is necessary for philosophy,
because a certain philosopher was at the same time
both handsome and a philosopher? Are you not
willing to observe and distinguish just what that is by virtue of which men become philosophers, and
what qualities pertain to them for no particular
reason? Come now, if I were a philosopher, ought
you to become lame like me ? What then ? Am I depriving you of these faculties ? Far be it from
me ! No more than I am depriving you of the faculty
of sight. Yet, if you enquire of me what is man's
good, 1 can give you no other answer than that it
is a kind of moral purpose.
CHAPTER IX
How from the thesis that rve are akin to God may a man
proceed to the consequences ? If what is said by the philosophers regarding the
kinship of God and men be true, what other course remains for men but that which Socrates took when
asked to what country he belonged, never to say " I am an Athenian," or " I am a Corinthian," but
" I am a citizen of the universe " ? For why do you
63
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
elvai aeavTov, ovy^l 5' e'^ i/celvrj^; fiovov tt}? ja)VLa<;,
3 ei? ^v eppL(j)r] <y€VV7]6eu aov to (Toy/jbdriov ; rj SrjXov
OTi (XTTO Tov Kvpicorepou Koi Trepte^oj/TO? ov fiovov
avTTjv eKeivr)v rrjv ycovtav, aXXa^ Kal oXrjv aov
TTjv oiKLav Kal a7rX&)9 oOev aov to <yevo<i tmv
irpoyovoov et? <re KaTe\rfK.v6ev ivrevOev irodev
4 Ka\€l<i aeavTov ' Adrjvaiov Kal Kopivdiov ; 6 roivvv
Tfj SLoiKrjarei TOV Koa/Mov 7rapi]Ko\ovOrjK(o<i koI
fiefiaO7)K(!)<;, oti " to fiiytcrTOV Kal KvpicoTarov xal
TrepieKTiKooTaTov ttuvtcov tovto eari to cTvaTrjfia
TO ef avdpcoiroyv Kal deov, cltt eKeivov he Ta
(TirepfiaTa KaTaireirTooKev ovk ei? tov iraTepa tov
ifiov fiovov ov8^ el<; tov irdTTirov, dX,X' eh diravTa
fiev TO, iirl 7^9 yevvoofievd re koI (pvofieva, irpo5
rfyovfievooi; S' et? to, XoyiKa, oti KOLVwvelv fiovov
TavTa Tve^vKev tm Oeat tyjs avvavacTTpocfirj^ KaTO,
6 TOV \6yov etT-LTreirXeyfieva,^^ 8ia tl firj etirr] ^ aiirov
Koafiiov ; Bid tl firj viov tov Oeov ; Sid tl 8e
(^o^rjdrjcreTaL tl to)v yiyvofievwv ev dvOpcoTTOi^ ; 7 dWd Trpo? fiev tov K.aiaapa rj avyyeveia rj dWov
Tivd TOiv fieya hvvanevwv ev Voofirj iKavrj irap6^6*1/
ev da(f)a\€La hLdyovTa<; Kal uKaTa^poifrfTov^
Kal SeSoiKOTai; firjS^ otlovv, to he tov deov TroirjTrfv
€^€LV Kal iraTepa Kal KrjBefiova ovKeTi rjfid<i e^ai8
prjaeTai Xvttwv Kal (})6^cov ; —Kat irodev (pdyco.
» Added by Schenkl.
* Tjs after fHri deleted by von Wilamowitz.
' The terms "Athenian," "Corinthian," etc., characterize
citizens of a country, not m£rely of a locality, i.e., citizens of Attica or Corinthia. The "corner" in which one was born
64
BOOK I. IX. 2-8
say that you are an Athenian, instead of mentioning
merely that comer into which your paltry body was
cast at birth ? Or is it clear you take the place
which has a higher degree of authority and comprehends
not merely that corner of yours, but also your
family and, in a word, the source from which your
race has come, your ancestors down to yourself, and
from some such entity call yourself " Athenian," or
*"' Corinthian " ? ^ Well, then, anyone who has attentively
studied the administration of the universe and
has learned that " the greatest and most authoritative
and most comprehensive of all governments is this
one, which is composed of men and God,^ and that
from Him have descended the seeds of being, not
merely to my father or to my grandfather, but to
all things that are begotten and that grow upon
earth, and chiefly to rational beings, seeing that by
nature it is theirs alone to have communion in the
society of God, being intertwined with him through
the reason," —why should not such a man call himself
a citizen of the universe ? Why should he not call himself
a son of God ? And why shall he fear anything
that, happens among men ? What 1 Shall kinship
with Caesar or any other of them that have great
power at Rome be sufficient to enable men to live securely, proof against contempt, and in fear of
nothing whatsoever, but to have God as our maker,
and father, and guardian,—shall this not suffice to deliver us from griefs and fears ?—And wherewithal
might have been Marathon, Rh&mnus, Lechaeam, Tenea, or the like.
* This seems to be a quotation from Poseidonius (Diogenes
Laertius, VII. 13S), but is also ascribed variously to the Stoics
in general and especially to Chrysippus (see Diels, Dozographi
Graeei, 4ft4, 20 and 465, 15, comparing 20 f. ). 65
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(f)r}(Ti,v, firjSev e%&)i' ;
—
Kal ttw? ol SovXot, 7rft)9 oi opaTrerai, tlvi TreTroidoref; eKclvoi airaWaTTOVTat
TWt' oecnroTbiv ; roi'i aypoif rj TOif OLK€Tai<i r) rot? apyvpco/xaaiv ; ovBevl, dW' kavrol^' koX 6p,(o<; ovk
9 eTTiXeLTrovcriv avrov^ rpo(j)ai. top Se (f)i,\6ao(j)ov
rjplv oerjaei dWoi^i dappovvra Kal iiravavavop^vov
dirohripelv kcll pr) iiripeKelcrdai. avrov avrov koI
Tbiv drjpiayv ro)v dXoycov elvai ')(€ipova Koi heiXorepov,
oiv cKuarov avro avrw dpKovpevov ovre
rpo(f)f]'i cLTTopel TTj^ olK€ia<; ovre 8i€^ay(oyrj<; t^9
KaTaXXTjXov Kal Kara (^vatv ; 10 £70) pev olpai, OTL eSet Ka6r]a0ai, tov irpecrfivrepov
ivTavda ov touto prj^^avcop^uov, otto)?
p,T) Ta7retvo4)pov^a-rjTe prjBe TaTreivov^ p-qS" dyevvet<?
rivaq 8iaXoyi<rpov^ ScaXoyieicrOe avrol irepl
11 eavTMV, dXXd prj, av^ rive^i ipTrcTrreocriv toiovtoi
veoi, €Tnyv6vre<i rrjv Trpo? toi)? 6eov<i avyyeveiav
Kal oTi 8e(Tp,d TLva ravra irpoarjpri)peOa to acopa
Kai TTjv Krrjaiv avrov Kal oaa tovtcov evcKa
avayKala rjpiv yiverai et? otKOvopiav Kal dva-
(TTpo^rjv TTjv iv TW /Sift), a><i ^dprj Tivd Kal dviapd
Kal d)(^pr)aTa diroppl-^ai deXaxriv Kal direXdelv
12 TT/Jo? rov<i avyyevel^' Kal tovtov eSei tov dySiva
dyoivl^ecrdaL tov hihdcrKaXov vpcov Kal iraihevTrjv,
el Ti<i dpa Tjv vpd<; p.ev €p)(^ea6ai XeyovTa^
" ^KTTLKTTjTe, ovKeTi dve^op^da p,erd tov a(op,aTiov
» Added by Elter.
* Referring to himself,
* There is less need of his urging them to regard themselves
as sons of God than of preventing them, if they are 66
I
BOOK I. IX. 8-12
shall I be fed, asks one, if I have nothing ?—And
how of slaves, how of runaways, on what do they
rely when they leave their masters ? On their lands,
their slaves, or their vessels of silver ? No, on
nothing but themselves ; and nevertheless food does
not fail them. And shall it be necessary for our
philosopher, forsooth, when he goes abroad, to depend
upon others for his assurance and his refreshment,
instead of taking care of himself, and to be more
vile and craven than the irrational animals, every one of which is sufficient to himself, and lacks neither
its own proper food nor that way of life which is appropriate to it and in harmonv with nature ? As for me, I think that the elder man i ought not
to be sitting here devising how to keep you from
thinking too meanly of yourselves or from taking in
your debates a mean or ignoble position regarding
yourselves ; ' he should rather be striving to prevent
there being among you any young men of such a
sort that, when once they have realized their
kinship to the gods and that we have these fetters
as it were fastened upon us, —the body and its possessions, and whatever things on their account
are necessary to us for the management of life, and
our tarrying therein,—they may desire to throw
aside all these things as burdensome and vexatious
and unprofitable and depart to their kindred. And
this is the struggle in which your teacher and
trainer, if he really amounted to anything, ought to
be engaged ; you, for your part, would come to him
saying : " Epictetus, we can no longer endure to be
convinced of this, from acting as if the life of the body were
a thing to throw aside, and so committing suicide,
—
a
practice which was defended by many Stoics. 67
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TOVTOv SeBefiivoi koI tovto Tped)ovT€<; koI ttotl-
^ovT€<; Kul dva7ravovT€<i Kal Kada'ipovTe<;, elra 8i' 13 avTO av/jLTT€pi(f)epo/j-€voi TolaBe /cat TolaSe. ovk
dBid<f)opa ravra koI ovSev tt/oo? yfid^; ; Kal 6 ddvaro<; oii kukov ^
; Kal crvyyevel'; Tive^ tov Oeov
14 iafiev KuKeWev eXijXuda/mev ; a^€<i ij/xaf dTreXOeiv
o6ei> i\r]\vda/Ji€v, a(pe<i \v9rjvai irore TOiv Seap-cov
16 rovTcop Tcov i^r)pTi]p,evo)v Kal ^apovvrcov. ivravOa
XrjcTTal Kal KXeTrrai Kal BiKacmjpia Kal ol KaXovfievoi
Tvpavvoi hoKovvre<; ex^*-^ rivd e<^' rjfilv
i^ovcriav Bid ro aiofidrtov Kal rd tovtov Krrip.ara.
d<p€<i Sel^cofiev avToi<;, on ov8€vo<; e^pvaLV e^ov16
aiav'^^ ifxe S' ivravda"^ Xeyeiv ore " dvOpcoTroi,
eK^e^aade tov Oeov. orav €K€ivo<: a-rj/xijvr] Kal
diroXva-rj vfj,d<; Tavrr)^ ri)^ vTrrjpeaia^;, tot' diroXveaOe
irpo'i avrov eirl he rou irapovro'i dvda'X'^ode
ivoiKovvTa Tavrrjv rrji/ ^w^aj', elf fjv 17 eKelvof vfid^ era^ev. 0X1709 dpa %poi^o9 ovro<;
6 Trj<; olKi]cre(o<; Kal paBio<; TOi? ovtco ScaKeifiei^oif. TTolof ydp en rvpawa rj 7roio<i KX€Tm]<i rj iroia
8iKaaT7]pia (f)o^epd T019 ot/Tco? Trap' ovSev Tre7roir]p,€uoL<;
to acofia Kal rd tovtov KTi^fiara
;
fieivaTe, firj dXoyLaTWi aTreXdijTC.
18 ToiouTot' Tt eSei yiveadat Trapd tov TraiBeuTOv
19 7r/30? T0U9 ev(f>v€i<i Tcov vetov. vvv he tL ylveTai
;
v€Kpo<i fiev 6 iraihevTrji;, veKpol 8' v/jLet<i. oTav
XppTaaOrjTe (rrjixepov, KddrjcrOe KXnovTef irepl t^<? 20 avpiov, TTodev (pdyrjTe. dvhpdiTohov, dv o'XV'*>
€^€i<i' dv /JLT] a-xv'i, e^eXevar)' i]voiKTai rj Ovpa.
TL 7rev6el<i ; ttov eVt totto? haKpuoi<; ; Tt9 eTi
^ Reiske : kuk^s S.
• Capps : tV rut S. 68
BOOK I. IX. I2-20
imprisoned with this p>altry body, giving it food and
drink, and resting and cleansing it, and, to crown
all, being on its account brought into contact with
these people and those. Are not these things
indifferent—indeed, nothing—to us? And is not
death no evil ? And are we not in a manner akin
to God, and have we not come from Him ? Suffer us to go back whence we came ; suffer us to be
freed at last from these fetters that are fastened to us and weigh us down. Here are despoilers and
thieves, and courts of law, and those who are called
tyrants ; thev think that thev have some power over
us because of the paltry body and its possessions.
Suffer us to show them that they have power over no one." And thereupon it were my part to sav
:
"Men, wait upon God. When He shall give the
signal and set you free from this service, then shall you depart to Him ; but for the present endure to abide in this place, where He has stationed you.
Short indeed is this time of your abiding here, and
easy to bear for men of your convictions. For what
tyrant, or what thief, or what courts of law are any
longer formidable to those who have thus set at naught the body and its possessions ? Stay, nor be
so unrational as to depart."
Some such instruction should be given by the
teacher to the youth of good natural parts. But
what happens now ? A corpse is your teacher and
corpses are you. As soon as you have fed your fill to-day, you sit lamenting about the morrow, wherewithal
you shall be fed. Slave, if you get it, you
will have it ; if you do not get it, you will depart
;
the door stands open. Why grieve ? Where is there yet room for tears ? What occasion longer
69
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
KoXaKCLWi d(})op/jL}'} ; 8ia rl aWo<; dWo) (^dovqcrei
;
8ia TL TToWa K€KTTjfiepov<i Oavfidcrei fj Tov<i iv hwafxet reTay/j,h'ov<i, fjbaktaT' dv koX lcr')(vpol 21 (oaiv Kat opyiXot ; Tt yap rjfuv iroirjaovaiv ; a
hvvavrai Troirjcrai, tovtcov ovk iiriaTpeyfroficOa'
uiv rjfiiv fiiXei, Tavra ov Svvavrai. Tt9 ovv ert dp^ei Tov ovTQ)^ BiaKei/iiei'OV ; 22 lift)? 1.03KpdTT]<i elx^v 7r/509 ravra ; ttco? yap
aWo)^ rj 0)9 ehei top ireTreia ixevov ort eVrt twv
23 deoov avyyevr]<; ; ""Av /xoi Xeyrjre,^^ (prjair, " vvv on ' dcpUfiev ere iirl rovrot^, ottoj? firjKeTL hiaXe^r]
TOVTOv<i rov<i \6yov<i ov<> p^XP'' ^^^ SieXeyov
fiTjSe TTapevo)(Xri(TeL<i rjpwv Tot9 veoc<; prjBe T0t9
24 yipovaiv,^ diroKpivovpaL oti yeXoioi iare, oltiv€<;
d^iovre, el p,€v pe 6 ai-paTviyo^ 6 vp,6Tepo<i era^ev
el<; riva Td^cv, oti eSei p,€ rrjpecv uvttjv Kal
(f)vXdTT€iv Kal fivpidfci^ irpoTepov aipeiadai
diToOvrjCTKeiv rj iyKaTaXiireip avrr)V, el 3' o ^eo9
€v rtvi X^P9 ''^'' dvacrrpocf)?} KaTaTerax^v, Tavrrjv
26 8' iyKaraXiTrelv Set rjp,d<;.^^ tout' ecntv dvOp(OTro<; 26 Tai9 dXr)deiai<i avyyevrj^; tcov 6eS)v. rjp,€c^ ovv
tt)9 KoiXiai, ft)9 evrepa, a)9 alSoia, ovtq) irepl
avTwv 8iavoovp,eOa, oti (po/Sovpeda, otc eiridupLOvpev
T0v<i et9 tuvtu avvepyelv huvapevov^
KoXaKevop,€V: TOi'9 avTOv<i TOVTOv<i SeBoiKupev.
27 'E/Lte Tf9 Tj^LooKei' virep uvtov ypdyjrai 6t9 ttjv
'P(i)p,r]v ft)9 eSoKci T049 TroXXoi<; rjTVX'f)'^^^ '^^'' irpoTepov pev eiTK^avrj'; wv Kal irXovaio^:, ixTTepov
fi' €K7reTrTcoK(o<i aTrdvTtov Kal Sidycov ivTavda.
^ A very free paraphrase of Plato, Apology, 29 c and 28 e.
* At Nicopolis.
70
BOOK I. IX. 20-27
for flattery ? Why shall one man envy another ? Why shall he admire those who have great possessions,
or those who are stationed in places of power,
especially if they be both strong and prone to anger ? For what will they do to us ? As for what they have
power to do, we shall pay no heed thereto ; as for the things we care about, over them they have no
power. Who, then, will ever again be ruler over the
man who is thus disposed ? How did Socrates feel with regard to these matters?
Why, how else than as that man ought to feel who
has been convinced that he is akin to the gods ? " If you tell me now," says he, " ' We will acquit
you on these conditions, namely, that you will no
longer engage in these discussions which you have
conducted hitherto, nor trouble either the young or the old among us,' I will answer, ' You make yourselves
ridiculous by thinking that, if your general
had stationed me at any post, I ought to hold and
maintain it and choose rather to die ten thousand
times than to desert it, but if God has stationed us
in some place and in some manner of life we ought
to desert that.' " ^ This is what it means for a man
to be in very truth a kinsman of the gods. We,
however, think of ourselves as though we were mere
bellies, entrails, and genitals, just because we have
fear, because we have appetite, and we flatter those
who have power to help us in these matters, and these same men we fear. A certain man asked me to write to Rome in his behalf Now he had met with what most men
account misfortune : though he had formerly been
eminent and wealthy, he had afterwards lost everything
and was living here.^ And I wrote in humble
7»
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
28 xayo) eypayfra vnep avTov raTreti/ft)?. o S' dva-
<yvov<i TT]v iirLCTToXriv aTreScoKev /xoi avrrjv koL €(f)T] OTi "'Eiyft) ^orjdrjdrivai Tt vtto (Tov rjOeXov, ov^t
29 eKerjOrjvai' kukov he fioi ovOev icmv,* ovt(o<;
Kal 'Pof)<^o9 Treipd^wv fi eloidei Xijeiv " %v/jL^^aerai
croL tovto kclI tovto vtto tov SeaTroTOv"
30 KCLfiov irpo^ avTOV aTroKpcvafievov on " ^AvOpcoTTtva,"
" Tt ovv ; €ti eKelvov TrapaKaXco irapa crov
31 raina ^ Xa^elv 8vvdfi,evo^ ; " t&) yap ovtl, o e^ avrov Ti? €)(ei, irepiaao'i koX fidrato^ nap* dWov
32 Xafi^dvcov. eyo) ovv e^^oov e^ ifiavrov Xa^elv to
p-eyaXoyfrv^ov kcu yevvalov, dypov irapa aov Xd^co
Kal dpyvpiov rj dpyrjv rcva ; firj yevono. ov^
ovTco<; dvaicrdrjTO'i eaop^ai rSiv efioiv KTi]p,dT(ov. 33 dXX* orav ti<; rj heiXo'^ kuI raTreivo^, virep tovtov
Tt dXXo r) dvdyKt} ypd(f)€iv eTTtcTToXa? tw? virep
veKpov " TO TTrSiixa rjpZv %a/9(crat tov Belvo<; xal
34 ^eaT'qv atpaTiov*' ; tA yap ovti irToyp-a 6 toiovto^
€<rTC Kal ^eaTr]<; alp^aTLOv, irXeov S' ovSev. el S' ^v rrXeou ti, ^crOdver dv, oti dXXos hC dXXov
ov SvaTV^ei.
I. Tlpb<i T0U9 irepl Ta? ev 'Vd>p,rj irpoayayh';
ecnrovhaKOTa^
1 Et oin(i}<i a^ohpoi^ avveTeTdfieOa irepl to epyov
TO eavTSiV u><i ol ev 'Vd)p,r} yepovTe^ irepl a
^ Schweighauser : avra S.
^ In his youth Epictetus had been a slave.
* The thought seems to be : If the punishment can be 72
BOOK I. IX. 27-x. I
terms in his behalf. But when he had read the
letter he handed it back to me, and said, " I wanted
your help, not your pity ; my pHght is not an evil one." So likewise Rufus was wont to say, to test
rae, " Your master ^ is going to do such-and-such a thing to you." And when I would say in answer.
"'Tis but the lot of man," he would reply. "What
then ? Am I to go on and petition him, when I can
get the same result from you ? " ^ For, in fact, it
is foolish and superfluous to try to obtain from
another that which one can get from oneself. Since,
therefore, I am able to get greatness of soul and
nobility of character from myself, am I to get a farm, and money, or some office, from you ? Far
from it ! I will not be so unaware of what I myself
possess. But when a man is cowardly and abject,
what else can one possibly do but write letters in
his behalf as we do in behalf of a corpse : " Please
to grant us the carcase of so-and-so and a pint of
paltry blood .'^ " ^ For really, such a person is but
a carcase and a pint of paltry blood, and nothing
more. But if he were anything more he would perceive
that one man is not unfortunate because of
another.
CHAPTER X
To those who have set their hearts on preferment
at Rome
If we philosophers had applied ourselves to our own work as zealously as the old men at Rome
humanly borne, I need not petition your master to remit
it, for you have within yourself the power to endure it. ' As when a friend might ask for the body of an executed
criminal
73
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
icTirovhaKaaiv, Tci^a av ri r^vvofiev koI avroi.
2 oiha iyco Trpecr^vrepov dvdpcoirov ifiov tov vvv
iirl TOV airov ovra iv 'Fm/mtj, ore ravrr) Traprj'yev arro t?)? <f>vyrj<; avacrTp€(f)(ov, ola elrirev jxoi,
KaTaTpe)(^cov tov irpoTepov kavTOv fiiov koI
TTepl TO)v ef/}? inayyeWofievo^, on aWo oi/Sev dva^a^ (TTTOvBdo'ei r) iv ricrv)(LO, Koi aTapa^ia
Sie^ayayelv to Xoittov tov ^lov " Hocrov yap
3 €Ti iaTtv i/jLol to Xolttov ;"—Kd7co ekeyov avTW
oTi " Ov 7rot»f(ret9, aX\' 6a^pavde\<i fiovov t?}?
'Pco/ut;? dircivTcov tovtcov im\7]crr}." av 8e Kal et? avXrjv 7rdpoB6<; ti<; SlBcotui, otl )(aipu)v Ka\
4 T^ 6€(p evxO'p'^o'Twv wcreTai.—""Av fi evprj^,^
€<f)r}, " 'E7rt«T77TC, TOV €T6pov TToSa et<? Tr;y avXrjv
5 TidevTa, o ^ovXei v7ro\dp,^ave." vvv ovv tl
iiroirjcrev ; irplv eXdelv et? Tr]v 'PmfMrjv, dynjVTr]- crav avTM Trapa KaLaapo<; TTivaKihe^;' 6 he Xa^oov
TrdvTcov eKeivcov e^eXdOeTO koi Xolttov ev i^ evbt
6 iiria-ecTMpevKev. rjdeXov avTov vvv 7rapacrTa<;
vTTOfivrjaai twv Xoycov, ou? eXeyev "Trapep^o/J-evo^;,
Kal etTTelv oti " ttoctm aov iyco KOfiyjroTepo'i ixdvTL<;
eifjn,. 7 Tt ovv ; iyco Xiyw, on dnrpaKTov eVrt to
^a>ov ; fj,r) yevotTO. dXXd Sia tl r^fiel^ ovk iafiev
8 •npaKTiKoi ; evdv<i iyo) tt/ocoto?, orav rjfxepa
yevTjTai, fiiKpd vnofMifivyaKOfiai, Tiva iirava74
BOOK I. X. 1-8
have applied themselves to the matters on which
they have set their hearts, perhaps we too should
be accomplishing something. I know a man older
than myself who is now in charge of the grain
supply 1 at Rome. When he passed this place on
his way back from exile, I recall what a tale he told as he inveighed against his former life and announced
for the future that, when he had returned to Rome,
he would devote himself solely to spending the
remainder of his life in peace and quiet, " For how
little is yet left to me ! "—And I told him, " You
will not do it, but when once you have caught no more than a whiff of Rome you will forget all this." And if also admission to court should be granted, I added that he would rejoice, thank God and push
his way in. —"If you find me, Epictetus," said he, " putting so much as one foot inside the court, think
of me what you will." Well, now, what did he do.'' Before he reached Rome, letters from Caesar met
him ; and as soon as he received them, he forgot
all those resolutions of his, and ever since he has
been piling up one property after another. I wish
I could stand by his side now and remind him of
the words that he uttered as he passed by here, and
remark, " How much more clever a prophet I am
than you 1
"
What then? Do I say that man is an animal
made for inactivity r ^ Far be it from me ! But how
can you say that we philosophers are not active
in affairs r For example, to take myself first : as soon as day breaks I call to mind briefly what author
' Praefectua annanae, a very important oflBcial during the Empire.
* As opposed in the ' active ' lives of business or politics.
75
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
yvoivai /xe Set. elra €udv<; ifxavrSt' " ri Si fioi Kal /jLeXei ttw? 6 Beiva avayvcp ; Trpwrov icniv,
9 Lva e7<i) KOifnjdo!)." kultoi tL ofjuota ra eKei- vcov TTpdyfiara Tot9 Tj/j,€T€poi<; ; av €Tricrrr]Te, Tt eKelpoL TTOiovaiv, alcrOi^aecrde. tL yap aWo
T} oXrjv Tr}v r)/ji,epav yfrijcfii^ovcrcv, av^rjTovai,
avfjb^ovXevovcTi irepX mTapiov, irepX aypiBiov,
10 irepi Tivcov irpoKoirMV toiovtcov ; ofiotov ovv
ia-Tiv ivTev^lSiov napd Tivot Xa^ovra avayiyvco-
(TKeiv "»7rapaKaXu> ce eTTirpeylrai fioi airdptov
i^ayayelv " ^ " irapaKoKo) ere irapa XpvcrLTnrou
€7riaK€\{raa0aL Tt? iaTiv r/ tov Koafiov SioiK-qcri^
Kal TToCav Tiva ')(^a)pav iv avrw e-^^ei to XoyiKou
^wov iiriaKeyfrai Be Kal rt? el av Kal ttocov ri
11 aov TO dyaOov Kal to KaKov^^ ; ravra eKeivoi<i ofioid eariv ; aXX' 6po[a<; (rTrouBt]^; ')(^peiav e^ovra ; 12 dXX oi}(TavT(o^ dfjueXelv ala")(^p6v tovtwv KaKeivwv ; n ovv ; r]ixel<i /jlovoi padv/jiov/j,ev Kal vvard^o/xev ; 13 ov' dXXa TToXv Trporepov vfjb€i<; ol veoi. eirel TOi Kal r^fiel'i 01 yepovre^;, orav iraii^ovTa'i opM/iev
veov<i, (rvfi7rpo9vp,ovfi€da Kal avrol (rvp,Tfat,^ei.v.
iroXv Be irXeov, el eatpcov Bieyr]yepp,evov<i Kal
(rv/jL7rpodv/xovfx.€vov<i, Trpoedv/xov/xijv av avaiTOvSd^eiv
Kal auTo?.
* The passage is somewhat obscure, because the precise
expression employed here occurs elsewhere only in Ench. 49. Apparently Epictetus read over, or made special preparation
upon a certain text, before meeting his pupils. In class tlien he would have a pupil read and interpret an assignment, some- 76
BOOK I. X. 8-13
I must read over.^ Then forthwith I say to myself:
" And yet what difference does it really make to me how so-and-so reads ? The first thing is that
I get my sleep." Even so, in what are the occupations
of those other men comparable to ours ? If you observe what they do, you will see. For what
else do they do but all day long cast up accounts,
dispute, consult about a bit of grain, a bit of land, or similar matters of profit ? Is it, then, much the same thing to receive a little petition from someone and read : " I beseech you to allow me to export a small quantity of grain," and this one : " I beseech
you to learn from Chrj'sippus what is the administration
of the universe, and what place therein the
rational animal has ; and consider also who you are, and what is the nature of your good and evil " ? Is this like that ? And does it demand the like
kind of study ? And is it in the same way shameful
to neglect the one and the other? What
then ? Is it we philosophers alone who take things
easily and drowse ? No, it is you young men far sooner. For, look you, we old men, when we see young men playing, are eager to join in the plav ourselves.
And much more, if I saw them wide-awake
and eager to share in our studies, should I be eager
to join, myself, in their serious pursuits.
what as in our "recitation," and follow that by a reading
and exposition of his own {ixavayv&vat), which was intended
to set everything straight and put on the finishing touches. See Schweighauser's note and especially Ivo Bruns, De Schola
Epicleti (1897), 8 f. By changing fit to ixoi, as Capps suggests, a satisfactory sense is secured, i.e., "what pupil must read
to me," but the iri in the compound verb would thus be
left without any particular meaning, aaid perhaps it is not
necessary to emend.
77
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
la! . Ilfpt (f)i\,o(TTopyia<;
1 *A<f)iKOfievov Be tivo<; tt/so? uutov rcav ev reXei
irvdofxevo'i •nap' avrov t^ eVt /xepovq rjpcarrjaev, 2 el KoX T€Kva eirj avrSi Kal yvvyj. rov 8' ofio- \o<yr)(Tavrof; TrpoaeirvdeTO' XIw, ri ovv ^(pij tw
Trpdy/xaTt, ; — A^\t&)9, €(f)r). —Kal o?* Tti/a
3 TpoTTOV ; ov yap Srj tovtov 7' evexa ya/xoucriv
avdpcoTTOi Kal TrachoTTOtovuTai, OTTCt)? ddXioi waiv,
4 dXka fiaXXov otto)? €v8ai,/xov€<;. —'AW' iyco, e(f)rj, ovTQ)^ d9\iw<i e')(^U) irepl to, Trathdpia, &(TTe irpwrjv
voaovvro^ fiov tov dvyarpiov Kal 86^avro<;
Kivhvveveiv ou')(^ virifieiva ov8e Trapeivai avrw
voaovvTi, (fivycov 8' o))(^6fiy]V, fie^pi<i ov Trpocry'jyyeiXe
rt? fioi on '^)(ei KaX(o<;. —Tt ovv ; 6p6S>^
6 (f)aivei aavTM Tuvra TreTToirjKevai ; —<I>y<ri«co9,
€(f)rj. —'AWa /Mrjv tovto fie irelaov, e<p^], crv, Bloti
ipvacKW^, Kul iya> ere irelcra), otl ttciv to Kara
6 (f)vcnv yivofxevov 6p9oi<i ylverat,. —Tovto, ecftr], TrdvT6<} r) o'C ye TrXelaroL irarepe'i Trda-)(^o/jLev.—
Oi)S' eyd) (Toi dvTiXeyco, e(f)j], otl ov yiveTai, to
S' d/ji(f)ia^T}TOVfxei^oi' rip.lv eKelvo iariv, el 6pdoi<i.
7 eirel tovtov 7' evcKa Kal ra <f)vp,aTa Sec Xeyecv
eir dyado) ylveadai tov cr(t)fji,aT0<i, oti yiveTai,
Kal aTrXco? to dfiapTdveiv etvai KaTa (pvaiv, oti
Travre? a^eSov 17 01 ye irXelaTot afxapTdvofiev.
78
BOOK I. XI. 1-7
CHAPTER XI
Offamily affection When an official came to see him, Epictetus, after
making some special enquiries about other matters,
asked him if he had children and a wife, and when
the other replied that he had, Epictetus asked the
further question, What, then, is your experience
with marriage?—Wretched, he said.—To which
Epictetus, How so ? For men do not marry and beget
children just for this surely, to be wretched, but
rather to be happy.—And yet, as for me, the other
replied, I feel so wretched about the little children,
that recently when my little daughter was sick and
was thought to be in danger, I could not bear even
to stay by her sick bed, but I up and ran away,
until someone brought me word that she was well
again. —VV' hat then, do you feel that you were acting
right in doing this? —I was acting naturally, he
said. —But really, vou must first convince me of this,
that you were acting naturally, said he, and then
I will convince you that whatever is done in accord- ance with nature is rightly done. —This is the way,
said the man, all, or at least most, of us fathers
feel. —And I do not contradict you either, answered
Epictetus, and say that it is not done, but the point
at issue between us is the other, whether it is rightly
done. For by your style of reasoning we should
have to say of tumours also that they are produced
for the good of the body, just because they occur, and
in brief, that to err is in accordance with nature, just
because praPtically all of us, or at least most of us, do err. Do you show me, therefore, how your
79
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
8 Bel^ov ovv fioi (TV, "jto)? Kara (fyvaiv ecniv.—Ov
Svvafiai, €(j)rj' aWa crv fioi fiaWov Sei^ov, ttco? 9 oi/K ecrri Kara (pvaiv ovS" 6p6(o<; jiverac.—Kat
o9' Aw' el i^rjTov/jLev, e<f>r), Trepl Xcvkcop kuI
fieXdvoyv, irolov av KpLTrjpiov TrapeKoXovfiev rrpo<i
hid'yvaxriv avTcov; —T^v opacnv, e(f>'rj, —Tt 8' el irepX OeppLwv kol yjrv^pcov kol (T/cXrjpcou koI jxaKa10
kS)v, irolov Ti ; —T^y d<f)7]v. —Ovkovu, iTreiSr} irepl
T(ov Kara <f)v(Tiv Kal r5>v 6p6S)<i rj ovk 6pda><f yivofiiucov
dfj,(f>i(T^r)Tov/jL€V, irolov 6e\ei<i KpirrjpLov
11 irapaXd^cofiev ; — Ovk olK, e(pr]. —Kal /xr]v ro
/xev Tftij' -x^payfidTcov Kal 6(Tp,oiv, en he 'x^uXSiv Kpnrjpiov d'yvoelv tv)(ov ov fieydXrj ^rj/nta, to
Se TOiV d'^aOttiv koX t5>v kukcov Kal roiv Kara
(pvaiv Kul irapa ^vaiv tw dvdpcoirq) Soxel aoi
jxiKpa i^7]p,[a eivai tw dyvoouvTi ; — H fieylaTrj
12 p,ev ovv.—^epe elire fiot, irdvTU a SokcI riaiv
elvai KaXd Kal irpoatjKovTa, 6pOco<; SoKel ; Kal vvv '\ovhaiot,<i Kal ^vpoi<; Kal Alyv7rrloi<i Kal
'Vo)p,aioi<i olov re irdvra rd hoKovvra irepl 13 rpo^rji; 6p6Si<i BoKclv ; —Kal ttw? olov re ; —'AXV
otfiai irdaa dvdyKT), el 6p9d ecrri rd ^ Alyvirrtcov,
/XT) opdd elvai Ta rcov dXXcov, ev Ka\(jd<; e^ei rd
^lovBaiwv, fjLT) KaX(t)<; e^^^ecv rd rcov dXXcov.—Ilw?
14 yap ov ; —"Oirov S' dyvoia, eKel Kal dfiadia Kal
17 irepl rd dvayKala diraiSevcrLa. —"Evvexoopei.—
15 Su ovv, €(f)i], Tovrwv al(T06p,evo<i ov8ev dXXo tov
•
* Added by Schweighauser.
80
BOOK I. XI. 7-15
conduct is in accordance with nature.—I cannot,
said the man ; but do you rather show me how it is not in accordance with nature, and not rightly done.
And Epictetus said : Well, if we were enquiring
about white and black objects, what sort of criterion
should we summon in order to distinguish between
them?—The sight, said the man.—And if about
hot and cold, and hard and soft objects, what
criterion?—The touch. —Very well, then, since we
are disputing about things which are in accordance
with nature and things which are rightly or not
rightly done, what criterion would you have us take?—I do not know, he said. —And yet, though
it is, perhaps, no great harm for one not to know
the criterion of colours and odours, and so, too, of
flavours, still do you think that it is a slight harm
for a man to be ignorant of the criterion of good
and evil things, and of those in accordance with
nature and those contrary to nature?—On the contrary,
it is the very greatest harm. Come, tell me,
are all the things that certain persons regard as good and fitting, rightly so regarded ? And is it possible at this present time that all the opinioni
which Jews, and Syrians, and Egyptians and Romans
hold on the subject of food are rightly held ^—And
how can it be possible ?—But, I fancy, it is absolutely
necessary, if the views of the Egyptians are right,
that those of the others are not right ; if those of
the Jews are well founded, that those of the others
are not.—Yes, certainly. —Now where there is ignorance, there is also lack of knowledge and the
lack of instruction in matters which are indispensable.
—He agreed. —You, then, said he, now that
you perceive this, will henceforth study no other
81
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
XoiTTOv o-TTOuSaVet? ovBe 7rpo<i dWco rivl T'qv
yvM^rjv e^et? 17 oirca to Kpirijpcov rSiv Kara
<f)vaiv KaTUfiaOoov Tovrffi Trpocr'x^pMfievo'i SiaKpivei^
T(t)v errl pepovi eKaarov.
16 Ett* oe Tov 7rap6vTO<; to. Toaavra 6%&j (tol
17 7rpo9 ^ovXet ^orjOfjaai. to (fnXoaTOpyov Sokci
aoi Kara (fivaiv r elvai koX koXov ; —Xlaj? yap
ou ; —Tt oe ; to fiev (f)i\6(TTop'yov Kara (fivatv t' e<7Tt /cat KoKov, ro S' evXayiarov ov koXov ; —
18 OvBafio)^.—Mr; to'lvvv pd)(^r)v e;^6f tw (f)iXoGTopya
TO evXoyiaTOp ; —Ou BokcI p,oi.—El Be
fit], tS}v p.a'xppevwv avdyxr] daTepov kuto, <f)uaiv
6vT0<; OuTepov elvai irapa (pvcriv ; r) yap ov ; —
19 Outoj?, k<^r). —OvKOvv 6 Tt av evptaKfOfxev ofiov
/JL€V (f>t,Xo(TTopyov ofiov 8' evXuyia-Tov, tovto
OappovvT€<; dTro(f>aiv6/J,€6a opdov t€ elvai Kal
20 KaXov ;—Ecttw, €<pr]. —Tt ovv ; d<f)eivai, voaovv
TO iratBlov Ka\ d(f)evra direXOelv oti p,ev ovk
evXayicTTOv ovk oipai a dvTepeXv. inroXelTreTai 8' T)pd<i (TKOirelv el (piXoaTopyov. —"^KOTrcopev 87]. —
21 Ap OVV av p,ev eTretSr] <^t,Xo(TT6pyw<i BieKeiao tt/do? TO iraihlov, opOoi^ eTroiei'i (pevycov Kal aTroXeliroov
avTQ ; Tj pyjTrjp S' ov (piXoaTopyel to iraiScov ; —
22 ^PiXoa-Topyel fiev ovv.—Ovkovv eSei Kal ttjv
fiTjTepa d(f)eivat, avTO r) ovk eSei ; —Ovk eSei.—Tt'
S' -q titOi] ; (TTepyei avTO ; —^Tepyei, ecjirj. —"EBei ovv KUKeivriv d(f)elvai avTo ; —Ov8ap,Q)<i.—Tt S' 6 23 TraiSaycoyo^ ; ov (TTepyei, avTO ; —^Tepyei.—-"ESet
^ The course of thought is, "You will have to do much
studying before you have mastered this subject ; but for the
present,"' etc. 82
BOOK I. XI. 15-23
subject and will give heed to no other matter than
the problem of how, when you have learned the
criterion of what is in accordance with nature, you
shall apply that criterion and thus determine each
special case. But for the present ^ I can give you the following
assistance toward the attainment of what you desire.
Does family affection seem to you to be in accord- ance with nature and good?—Of course.—What
then ? Is it possible that, while family affection is in accordance with nature and good, that which is reasonable is not good?—By no means.—That which
is reasonable is not, therefore, incompatible with
family affection?—It is not, I think. —Otherwise,
when two things are incompatible and one of them
is in accordance with nature, the other must be
contrary to nature, must it not ?—Even so, said he.
—
Whatever, therefore, we find to be at the same time
both affectionate and reasonable, this we confidently
assert to be both right and good ? —Granted, said
he.—What then ? I suppose you will not denv that
going away and leaving one's child when it is sick is at least not reasonable. But we have yet to consider
whether it is affectionate. —Yes, let us consider
that. —Were you, then, since you were affectionately
disposed to your child, doing ri^ht when you ran away and left her f And has the mother no affection
for her child ?—On the contrary, she has affection .
—
Ought then the mother also to have left her child, or ought she not ?—She ought not.—What of the nurse ? Does she love her child ?—She does, he
said. —Ought, then, she also to have left her?—By
no means. —What about the school attendant ? Does
not he love the child ? —He does. —Ought, then, he
83
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovv KUKelvov a^evra aireXOeiv, eld* ovtco<; eprj/Mov
Kal a^orj6r]Tov dTroX€i.(f>dr]vai ro Traihiov hia tt)v
TroWr]v <^i\.oaropyvav t&v yovecov vfiwv koI tcop
trept, avTo rj iv Tal? '^epcnv twv ovre arepyovTcov
24 ovre K^jBo/xeucov uTToOaveiv ; —M^ yevotro. —Kai
firjv eKelvo je dvicrov koX dyvco/xov, 6 Tt? avru) ^ TTpocrriKov olerat Sia to (f)i\6aTopjo<i elvai, rovro
Tol<i OfiOLCO^ (f)iXoaropyou<Tiv fir) i(f)ievai;—
25 "Atottov.—"Aye, av 8' av vocrwu r/^ovXov (piXo-
(n6pyov<i ovra><i ex^tv tov<} 7rpocn]KOVTa<; rov<i T dXXov^ Kal avrd to, reKva Kal rrjv •yvvaiKa,
oiar af^edrjvat fxovo^ vtt' avrSiv Kal epr}pio<; ; —
26 OvBafico^.—Ev^aio 8' av ovtq)<: (rrepydr^vaL vtto TO)v aavTov, toare Bi.d ttjv dyuv avrwv (piXo-
(TTopyiav ael p6vo<; airoXeiTTecrdat iv Tal<; v6<Toi<i,
rj TovTov y eveKa fidXXov av viro tmv i^Opciyv,
el Bwarov rjv, (fytXocrTopyelcrdai r^v-^ov, war
aTroXeLTrecrdai vtt* avroiv ; el Be ravra, vTToXeinerai
/in]Ba/j.co<; en (f)cX6aTopyov elvat to irpax^ev.
27 Tt ovv ; ovBev rjv ro KLvrjcrdv ae Kal e^op/xfjaav
7rp6<? TO d(f)eivai to TraiBlov ; Kal tto)? olov re ; dXXa roiovTov ri rjv,^ olov Kal ev 'Vco/itj tivcl
r)v TO Kivovv, co<TT iyKaXvTTTeaOai rov lttttov TpexovTO<; a>^ earcovBaKeL, elra viK/jaavro^ ttotg
irapaXoyoi^ (Tiroyywv Berjaat avrw irpo^ to
28 dvaXrjcpOrjvai XnroyfrvxovvTa. ri ovv rovro eariv ; TO /J.ev uKpi^e^i ov rov rrapovro^ Kaipov rvypv'
eKelvo 8' dtrapKeX ireicrOrjvaL, elrrep vyLe<i eari ro
VTTO rwv (f>iXo(r6<f)aiv Xeyofxevov, on ovk e^co irov
84
* 8 TJ J 56 : avraii Sc : 8t« ffavrui S.
* Bentley : i.v S (^v or t^v ?iv J. B. Mayor).
* Salmasius and Upton's ' codex '
: &>% S.
BOOK I. XI. 23-28
as well to have gone away and left her^ so that the
child would thus have been left alone and helpless
because of the great affection of you her parents and
of those in charge of her, or, perhaps, have died in the arms of those who neither loved her nor cared for her?—Far from it!—And yet is it not unfair and
unfeeling, when a man thinks certain conduct fitting for himself because of his affection, that he should
not allow the same to others who have as much affec- tion as he has ?—That were absurd. —Come, if it had
been you who were sick, would you have wanted all your relatives, your children and your wife included,
to show their affection in such a way that you would
be left all alone and deserted by them ?—By no
means. —And would you pray to be so loved by your
own that, because of their excessive affection, you
would always be left alone in sickness ? Or would you,
so far as this is concerned, have prayed to be loved
by your enemies rather, if that were possible, so as to be left alone by them ? And if this is what you
would have prayed for, the only conclusion left us is that your conduct was, in the end, not an act of
affection at all. What, then ; was the motive nothing at all which
actuated you and induced you to leave your child ? And how can that be ? But it was a motive like
that which impelled a certain man in Rome to cover
his head when the horse which he backed was
running,—and then, when it won unexpectedly, they
had to apply sponges to him to revive him from his faint ! What motive, then, is this } The scientific explanation, j)erhaps, is not in place now ; bat it is enough for us to be convinced that, if what the
philosophers say is sound, we ought not to look
85
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Bet ^Tjrelv avro, aX)C ev koI tuvtov icrrcv cttI iravTcov to atrcov tov TTOietv ti r]na<; rj fit] iroielv,
Tov Xeyetv riva rj firj Xeyecv, rov iTTaipeaOai, rj 29 (TvcneWecrdai rj (fieuyeiv riva rj hicoKeiv, rovd^
oTtep Kai vvv ifiOL re Koi aoi f^eyovev aircov, aol
fiev TOV eXdelv irpb^ ifie Kal vaSrjadai vvv aKovovTU, efiol Se tov \iyeiv TavTa. tc S' earl
30 TOVTO ; apd ye dWo rj oti eSo^ev '^filv ; —
Ovhev.—Et 8 a\X(W9 r^fxiv e(f)dvr], tL av dWo tj 31 TO So^av irrpcLTTOfiev ; ovkovv koX tm ^A^iWel
TOVTO ULTLOV TOV TTCvdetV, OIJ-^ 6 TOV YlaTpOKXoV
6dvaT0<i (dWo^ ydp Ti<t ov irda-^^ec ravTa tov
32 eToipov aTTodavovTos:), a\X' oti eho^ev avro). Kal
(Tol Tore (pevyetv tovto avro oti eSo^ev aoi' Kal
irdXiv, edv /Lieti/j/?, oti eSo^ev aoi. Kal vvv ev
'VoyfiT) dvep-^r], oti hoKet cror kcLv /xeTaBo^rj, ovk
33 av direXevar). Kal dirXoi's ovTe ddvaT0<i ovTe
(^vyrj ovTe ttoi^o? ovtc dXXo ti to)v toiovtoov
atTLOV ecTTi TOV irpuTTeiv ti rj /xtj rrpdTTeiv r)fid<;, dXX^ vTToXrj-^^ei^ Kal Boj/uaTa.
34 Tovto ae ireido) rj ov')(i ; —Ilet^et?, e(f)r]. —Ola
8r) TO. acTia e^' eKdaTov, TOiavTa Kal Ta dnore35
Xovfieva. ovkovv oTav fxr) 6p65)<i ti irpaTTafiev,
diTO TavTri<i tt}? r)/u.epa^ ovBev dXXo airiaaofieda
rj TO Boy/xa, d<p^ ov avTO eirpd^ap-ev, KaKelvo
86
BOOK I. XI. 28-35
for the motive anywhere outside of ourselves, but
that in all cases it is one and the same thing that
is the cause of our doing a thing or of our not
doing it, of our saying thhigs, or of our not saying
them, of our being elated, or of our being cast down,
of our avoiding things, or of our pursuing them—the
very thing, indeed, which has even now become a cause of my action and of yours ; yours in coming to me and sitting here now listening, mine in saying
these things. And what is that .' Is it, indeed,
anything else than that we wanted to do this ?
—
Nothing. —And supposing that we had wanted to do
something else, what else would we be doing than
that which we wanted to do .' Surely, then, in the
case of Achilles also, it was this that was the cause of his grief—not the death of Patroclus (for other
men do not act this way when their comrades die),
but that he wanted to grieve. And in your case the other day, the cause of your running away was
just that you wanted to do so ; and another time, if you stay with her, it will be because you wanted to
stay. And now you are going back to Rome,
because you want to do so, and if you change your
mind and want something else, you will not go.
And, in brief, it is neither death, nor exile, nor toil, nor any such thing that is the cause of our doing, or of our not doing, anything, but only our opinions and
the decisions of our will. Do I convince you of this, or not ? —You convince
me, said he. —Of such sort, then, as are the causes
in each case, such likewise are the effects. Very
well, then, whenever we do anything wrongly, from
this day forth we shall ascribe to this action no other
cause than the decision of our will which led us to 87
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
i^aipeiv Koi eKTefiveiv ireipaaofieda fiaXkov rj ra
(f)VfiaTa Kai ra airoarrjixara ck tov aci}fiaTO<;. 36 &)crauT&)9 Be kul rSiv 6p6oi<; irpaTTOfievoyv ravrov
37 TOVTO acnov airoipavov/xev. Kal ovt olKerrjv en
alrLacr6p.eda ovre yeiTova ovre 'yvvaiKa ovre rexva
Q)S alrid Tivcov KanSyv rjiuv ytvofiepa TreTreiafievot on, av fir) rjfiiv Bo^-ij roiavTci nva elvat, ov Trpdrrofiev
TO, uKoXovdw TOV Bo^ai Be fj p,rj Bu^ai, r}iMel<i 38 Kvpioi Kol ov TO, e/CT09.
—
0£It&)9, €<f)rj. —.'Atto T-79 arjixepov toIvvv rjpLepa^ ovBev dWo CTncrKorr^aofiev
ovB' i^eTiicrofiev, trolov n eanv rj ttw? ^'%f'. oine
TOV dypov ovre to, dvBpaTToBa ovre tov? iTTTrov?
rj Kvpa<;, dWa to, BoyfiaTa.—Kv')(^ofiai, €<f)Tj. —
39 'Opa<; o^v, oti (T^oXacrTiKov ere Bel yeveadai,
TOVTO TO ^a)ov ov 7rdvT€^ KaTayeXwcTtv, etirep
dpa OiXei'i iirLaKeyfriv TOiV cravrov BoyfiaToov
40 TTOielcrdai. tovto S' on fiid<i a>pa<: rj 'qp,epa^ ovk
eaTiv, €7nvoec<; kuI avTo^.
iff . Tlepl evapeaTrjaeoat
i Ylepl 6eS)v 01 fiev Tive<i elaiv oi XeyovTC^ firjS' elvai TO delov, oi S' elvai fxev, dpyov Be Kal
2 a^eXe? xal firj irpovoelv fir)B€v6<{' Tpiroi 8' oi Ka\
elvat Kal Trpovoelv, dWa t&v /xeyaXcov Kai
ovpavioov, tmv Be eVl 7^9 firjBevoi;' reTaproi 5'
^ As, for example, good, or pleasant.
* So Epicurus ; see Uscner, Epicurea, frg. 368. 88
BOOK I. XI. 35-xii. 2 do it, and we shall endeavour to destroy and excise
that cause more earnestly than we try to destroy
and excise from the bodv its tumours and abscesses
And in the same May we shall declare the same thing
to be the cause of our good actions. And we shall no longer blame either slave, or neighbour, or wife, or children, as being the causes of any evils to us, since we are persuaded that, unless we decide that
things are thus-and-so,^ we do not perform the corre- sponding actions ; and of our decision, for or against
something, we ourselves, and not things outside of
ourselves, are the masters.—Even so, he said. —From
this very day, therefore, the thing whose nature or condition we shall investigate and examine will be
neither our farm, nor our slaves, nor our horses, nor
our dogs, but only the decisions of our will. —I hope
so, he said. —You see, then, that it is necessary for you
to become a frequenter of the schools,—that animal
at which all men laugh,—if you really desire to make
an examination of the decisions of your own will. And that this is not the work of a single hour or day
you know as well as I do.
CHAPTER XII
Of contentment Concerning gods there are some who say that the
divine does not so much as exist ; and others, that it exists, indeed, but is inactive and indifferent, and
takes forethought for nothing ; ^ and a third set,
that it exists and takes forethought, though only
for great and heavenly things and in no case for
terrestrial things ; and a fourth set, that it also takes
VOL. I. E ^9
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ol ^ Kul TOiv iirl 7^9 Kol r&v avdpcoTrivcov, ei9 Koivov Se fiovov Koi oi-^l 8e koI kut IBiav
3 eKcicrTov TrefiTTTOc 8\ oiv rjv xal '08u<rcreu9 /cal 'Z(OKpdTrj<;, ol \eyovT€<} oti
ovSe ae \rj6co
KlVVfl€VO<;.
4 rioXu irporepov ovv ava'^Kolov ken irepl
eKaarov tovtwv iTr€(TKi(p0ai, irorepa 1/74609 17 5 ou;^ vyia)<; Xeyofievov ianv. el yap /u,r} elaiv
6eoi, 7r&>9 icTTC TeXo9 eireadaL 6eol<i ; el S' elalv
fiev, /j,T)Bevo<; 3' eTrifieXovp.evoi,, koi ovtco^ 7ra)9 6 vyce<; ecnai ; dWa Btj koI ovrcov Kal eTrifieXo- fievwv el firjSefila 8id8ocn<i el<; dvOpcoTrov^ ecnlv
e^ avTwv Kol vr) Ata ye Kal 619 ip-e, 7rft)9 Irt
7 Kal ouTQ)<; vyie<i ecTTiv ; iravra ovv ravra
Ka\o<; Kal dyado<i eirecTKep.p.evo^ ttjv avTov
yvcofjLTjv viroreTa-yev to3 Sloikovpti Ta o\a
KaOd-nep 01 dyadol TroXirai t« v6p,(p rrj<; 8 7ro\€a)9. 6 8e TraiSevofievo^ Tavrrjp 6(f).elXei rrjv
e7rc/3oXrju ex(op iXdelv iirl to iraiheveadai, "7rft)9 av e7roifjLr}v iyo) ev iravrl Tot9 6eol<i Kal 7r<W9 av
evapearoLrjv rfj deia SioiKrjaei Kul 7rco9 av ye9
voLp,rjv i\evOepo<i ; " eXevOepo'^ yap ecniv, w y'lveTai
irdvra Kara TvpoaipecTLv Kal ov ov8el<i hvvarai
10 KcoXvaai. rl ovv ; dirovoLa ecmv rj eXevdepta ; fiT] yevoLTo. p.avla yap Kal eXevOepia etV ravrov
11 ovK ep)(^eTai. " dXX^ eycD OeXm irdv to 8okovv fxoi 12 diro^aiveiv, Kav oircocrovv Bokt}." fj,aiv6p.€vo^ el,
TTapa(j)povel<;. ovk olSa<i, oti koXov tl iXevdepta
* Schenkl : Sf S, ot Stobaeus. 90
BOOK I. XII. 2-12
forethought for things terrestrial and the affairs of
men, but only in a general way, and not for the
individual in particular; and a fifth set, to which
Odysseus and Socrates belonged, who say
Nor when I move am I concealed from thee.^ We must, therefore, first of all enquire about each
of these statements, to see whether it is sound or not sound. For if gods do not exist, how can it be an end to follow the gods ? And if they exist,
indeed, but care for nothing, how even thus will that conclusion be sound ? But if, indeed, they
both exist and exercise care, yet there is no communication
from them to men,—yes, and, by Zeus,
to me personally, —how even in this case can our
conclusion still be sound? The good and excellent
man must, therefore, inquire into all these things,
before he subordinates his own will to him who administers
the universe, precisely as good citizens
submit to the law of the state. And he that is being instructed ought to come to his instruction
with this aim, " How may I follow the gods in everything,
and how may I be acceptable to the divine
administration, and how may I become free ? " Since he is free for whom all things happen according
to his moral purpose, and whom none can
restrain. What then? Is freedom insanity? Far
from it ; for madness and freedom are not consistent
with one another. " But I would have that
which seems best to me happen in every case, no
matter how it comes to seem so." You are mad
;
you are beside yourself. Do you not know that
^ Homer, Iliad, X. 279 f. ; compare XeDophon, Memorabilia,
L 1, 19. 9X
ARRIAN'S. DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
earl koX d^ioXoyov ; to S' ei)9 €TV)(ev /xe ^ovXeaOai
ra^ ci)? eTV)(ev Bo^avra yivecrOai, toOto
Kivhvvevei ov fiovov ovk elvai KaXov, aXka koI
irdvrwv ala')(^icrrov elvai. 7r(o<i <ydp eVi <ypa/x/xa13
TiKcov TTOtovfiev ; ^ovkoyuai ypdipeip co? 6e\(o
TO Ai&)V09 ovofia ; ov' aXXd SiSdaKOfxat deXeiv,
0)9 Set ypd(p€cr6ai. tl cttI povaiKwv ; waavTcof.
14 Tt ip T& KaOoXoV, OTTOV Te^VV T*? V iTTlO'TljpTJ ia-TLV ; el he firj, ovB€v6<i rjv d^iov to eiriaTaaOaL
Tt, el Tai<; CKdaTcov ^ovXtjcrecrc Trpo(jT]pp.6^€TO.
15 ivTavda ovv fiovov €ttI tov fieyiaTov koX
KupiwTdTOV, T^9 €\.evdepia<i, to? exf^ei/ i(f>eiTaC
fxoL deXeiv ; ovBap^(t)<i, dWd to iraiheveaOai tovt
ea-Ti p,av6dv€t.v eKaaTa ovto) dekeiv o)? yivcTai.
TT&i? Se yiveTai ; ai<i BiCTa^ev avTO, 6 BiaTaaawv.
16 SicTa^e Se Oipo<i elvai kuI ')(^eLp,S)va koX <f)opdv koX
d(f)opLav Kol dp€TT]V Koi KUKiav KOI irdaa'i to,^
TOtavTa^ ei'avTi6Tr]Ta<; inrep avficfycovla'; TOiv 6\wv
r)p,S)v 0* kfcdaTW adpa kol p^eprj tov (TtofiaTo^i Koi
KTTJaiv Kul Koiv(i)vov<i ehwKev.
17 TavTi]'; ovv Tr)<i Starafew? pepvripei'OV<i ep-
)(^ecrOai Bel eVl to TraiBevecrOai, ov^ "^' dWd-
^oipiev Td<i V7ro0eaei<i {oine yap BiBoTai r]plv ovt
dfietvov), dW iva outco? e^ovTcov tS)v irepl rjpd<i
ft)? €X€i fcal 7re(pvKev avTol ttjv yv(op,i]v tt^v avT&v (Tvvrjppoap,€vr]v rot? ytvopivoi^ e')(^b>p,ev. 18 Tt ydp ; eVSe^erat (f)vy€iv dvdpcoirovi ; xal ttco'? olov T€ ; dWd avvovTa^ avToi<; eKeivovq dWd^ai
;
19 Kal Tt9 r)fuv BiBcoaiv ; tL ovv dTToXeineTai f) Tt9
* Schweighauser : ^h. 5* S. 93
BOOK I. XII. 12-19
freedom is a noble and precious thing ? But for me
to desire at haphazard that those things should
happen which have at haphazard seemed best to me, is dangerously near being, not merely not noble,
but even in the highest degree shameful. For how
do we act in writing .'' Do I desire to write the
name " Dio '' as I choose? No, but I am taught to desire to write it as it ought to be written. What
do we do in music? The same. And what in general, where there is any art or science ? The
same ; otherwise knowledge of anything would be
useless, if it were accommodated to everj- individual's
whims. Is it, then, only in this matter of freedom,
the greatest and indeed the highest of all, that I am permitted to desire at haphazard ? Bv no means,
but instruction consists precisely in learning to desire
each thing exactly as it happens. And how do they
happen ? As he that ordains them has ordained.
And he has ordained that there be summer and
winter, and abundance and dearth, and virtue and
vice, and all such opposites, for the harmony of
the whole, and he has given each of us a body,
and members of the body, and property and
companions.
Mindful, therefore, of this ordaining we should go
to receive instruction, not in order to change the constitution
of things,—for this is neither vouchsafed
us nor is it better that it should be,—but in order
that, things about us being as they are and as their
nature is, we may, for our own part, keep our wills
in harmony with what happens. For, look vou, can we escape from men ? And how is it possible ? But
can we, if they associate with us, change them ? And who vouchsafes us that power ? What alterna93
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
evpicTKerai firj'^avri irpoi; rrjv "y^prjcnv avrwv ; TOiaxmj, 8t' 979 €fC€Lvoi fiev rroi^crovcn to, (pacvofieva
auT0t9, ^/^ei? 8' ovBev rjTjov Kara <f)vaiv 20 e^ofiev. (Tv B aTa\ai'irwpo<i el Kal 8v(rdp€(TT0<;
Kav fiev fx6vo<; 179, iprj/xiav /caXet9 rovro, av Se p^era dvOpcoTrcop, eVt/3ou\oi'9 Xiyea Kal \r](nd<i,
p,€p^rj 8e Kal <yov€i<; rov<; aeavrov Kal leKva Kal
21 d8e\(f)ov<; Kal yecTova';. eSei 8e p^ovov jxevovra
ricyv')(iav KaXeiv avro Kal eKevdepiav Kal opoiov
Tot9 ^eot9 rjjeladai avrov, pbera iroXXcov B^ ovra
p,T) oyXov KaXelv prjSe dopv^ov p,rjB' drjhiav, dXhJ
eopTTjv Kal iravi'jyupiv Kal ovt(o<; wdvra evapi(TT<o<i
T19 ovv 77 /coXa<7t9 T0t9 ov TTpoaSe'X^opevoi'; ; 22 TO ovTwt ey^eiv 0)9 exovcrtv. hvcrapecnel rtf tw
povo^ elvai ; €<tt<o iv eprjpia. hvaapearel ra
T0t9 yovevaiv ; earo) KaKO<i vlo<i Kal Trevdeijo).
hva-apecrrel toi<; reKvoi^ ; €<ttq) KaKOf iraTrjp. 23 " ySaXe avrbv e/9 <f)v\aK7]v." Troiav <pv\aKi]V
;
OTTov vvv icrriv. clkcov ydp iariv ottov Se Tt9 aKCdv ecyriv, eKeivo (f)v\aKT) avrw ecniv. Kado
Kal X(OKpdTr]<; ovk rjv iv (j>v\aKfj, €KQ)v ydp
24 ^v. " (TKe\o<i ovv p,oi yeveaOai ireTrripcopevov"
avSpdiroSov, elra St ev (TKeXvSpiov to) k6ctp,u>
iyKa\el<; ; ovk eTriBooaei'i avro toi<; oXot9 ; ovk
diroaTrjar] ; ov ^^^at/Jtut' 7ra/>a%(wpr;o-6t9 TOi Se- 25 ScoKOTi ; dyavaKT7]a€i<; 8e Kal Bvcrape(TTr](Tei<; Tot9
VTTO Tov Ato? 8iaT€Tayp6voi<;, d eKctvo^ perd rSiv
M.otpa)v irapovawv Kal eTrtKXwdovacov <rov rrjv 26 yiveaiv a>pia€V Kal Scera^ev ; ovk olcrOa, rjXiKov
94
BOOK I. XII. 19-26
tive remains, then, or what method can we find for living with them ? Some such method as that, wliile they will act as seems best to them, we shall none the
less be in a state comformable to nature. But you
are impatient and peevish, and if you are alone, you
call it a solitude, but if you are in the company of
men, you call them schemers and brigands, and you
find fault even with your own parents and children
and brothers and neighbours. But you ought, when
staying alone, to call that peace and freedom, and
to look upon yourself as like the gods ; and when
you are in the company of many, you ought not call that a mob, nor a tumult, nor a disgusting thing,
but a feast and a festival, and so accept all things
contentedly.
What, then, is the punishment of those who do
not accept ? To be just as they are. Is one peevish
because he is alone ? Let him be in solitude ! Is he peevish with his parents ? Let him be an evil son and grieve I Is he peevish with his children } Let him be a bad father I " Throw him into prison."
What sort of prison .'' Where he now is. For he is there against his will, and where a man is against his
will, that for him is a prison. Just as Socrates was
not in prison, for he was there willingly. " Alas,
that I should be lame in my leg ! " Slave, do you,
then, because of one paltry leg blame the universe ? Will you not make a free gilt of it to the whole?
Will you not relinquish it.' Will you not gladly
yield it to the giver ? And will you be angry and
peevish at the ordinances of Zeus, which he defined
and ordained together with the Fates who spun in
his presence the thread of your begetting r Do you
not know how small a part you are compared with
95
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
fiepo<i 'irpo<; to, 6\a ; rovro Be Kara rb a-ay/xa, t09 AcaTtt <y€ TOP Xoyov ovSev ')(eipa)V twv Oecov ov8e fiiKporepo^:' \6yov yap /xeyedo^; ov /j.i]K€i ou5' {jyjrei Kpiverai, aXXa Sojfiaaip.
27 Ou 6e\€C<i ovv, KaG' a Xao<i el Tol<i deoi<;, eKel
28 wov rideadat ro ayadov ; " Ta\.a<; eyco, top
irarepa ex<^ toiovtov Kal ttjv firjTepa." rC ovv ; iSiSoTo croi irpoeXOovTi eKke^acrOai Kal elirelv " 6 Becva T^ Beh'i avveXOeTw TrjSe rfj u>pa, iva
29 iyo) yevatfiai " ; ovk iSiSoTo. aX)C eSec irpovnoarrjval
crov Toy? yovets, elra ovtci)<; yevvTjdrjvai. 30 6« TToioyv Tivcbv ; e'/c toiovtcov, ottoIoi fjaav. ri ovv ; ToiovTcov avTMv ovTcov ovBep,ia <rot BlBorai
p.rj'^avrj ; eir' el p,ev t7]v opariKTjv Bvvafiiv rjyvoei^
•jrpb<; Ti KCKTrjaai, BvaTVXV'* ^^ V** *^* d6Xio<i,
el KaTefjLV€<i, Trpoaayovrwv act r&v ;^/0&)/iaTG)i/ ri'^ on Be /xeyaXoyjrvxlav exoiv Kal yevvatoTrjTa tt/jo?
CKacrra rovrcov ayvoei<i, ov BvcrTV^'^arepo'; el Kal
31 ddXicorepo^ ; irpoadyerai aoi to, KaTaXXrjXa ttj
Bwd/Mei fjv e^ei^' crv 8' uvttjv Tore fidXiara
d'iro(TTpe<^eL<i, birore rjvoiypevrjv Kal ^Xeirovaav
32 eyj^Lv eBei. ov fidXXov evxctpicrrei^ T0t9 d€ol<;,
on ae eirdvoi tovtwv d^rjKav oaa /jltjB^ eiron^crav
iirl croi, povov 8' virevdvvov aTri^rjvav tcov iirl 33 <70fc ; yoveuiv eveKa dwirevdwov d(f>rJKav' dBeX-
^ Added by Diels. 96
BOOK I. XII. 26-33
the whole ? That is, as to the body ; for as to the
reason you are not inferior to the gods, nor less than
they ; for the greatness of the reason is not determined
by length nor by height, but by the decisions
of its will. Will you not, therefore, set what is for you the
good in that wherein you are equal to the gods ? " Wretched man that I am ; such a father and such a mother as I have ! " Well, was it permitted you
to step forward and make selection, saying, " Let
such-and-such man have intercourse with such-andsuch
woman at this hour, that I may be born " ? It was not permitted you ; but your parents had to exist first, then you had to be born as you were
born. Of what kind of parents ? Of such as they
were. What then ? Since they are such, is no remedy given you f Again, supposing that you were
ignorant of the purpose for which you possess the
faculty of vision, you would be unfortunate and
wretched if you closed your eyes when men brought some colour before them ; but in that you have
greatness of mind and nobility for use for everyone
of the things may happen to you, and know it not, are you not yet more unfortunate and wretched ? Things
proportionate to the faculty which you possess are brought before you, but you turn that faculty away
at the very moment when you ought to keep it wide
open and discerning. Do you not rather render
thanks to the gods that they have allowed you to be superior to all the things that they did not put
under your control, and have rendered you accountable
only for what is under your control ? As for parents, the gods have released you from accountability
; as for brothers, they have released you ; 97
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(}>a)v eveKU d(f)T]Kav, adiiiaro^ epexa d<f}7]Kav, 34 «T»;cr6&)?, davdrov, l^wrj'i. tlvo<; ovv inrevdwov
<T€ eTToirjcrav ; tov jmovov 6vto<; eVi crot, ^pr;cre(o9 36 oJa? Set (pavTaaiwv. tI ovv iiriaTrd^ aeavTO)
ravra mv dvv7r€v6vvo<; el ; rovro eariv eavrd)
'irape')(eiv TrpdyfiUTa.
ly. n&>9 exaara ecrriv iroielv dpea-rw^; OeoU
1 J1v6o/jI,€vov 8e Tivo<;, irco^; eariv iadUiv dpecrrcoi;
deol<iy Et BiKaca)^ eariv, eipt), koI €vypa>fj,6v(o<; koI
Icrcos Kol iyKpaT(t)<i Kai KoapLco'i, ovk eari koX dpecr2
T&)9 T0t9 Oeol^ ; orav he deppLOV alTijaavTo^i crov
fiT) vTraKovaj) 6 7rat9 rj vTraKovaa^ ')^7uap(OTepov
iveyfcrj rj p-rjS' evpedfj ev rj} oIklo,, to p.r) '^(^aXeTraLveiv
firjSe p-qyvvcrdaL ovk eariv dpearov Tot9 6eoL<; ; —
3 n&>9 ouv Tt9 dvda'X^rjTai tcjv roiovToov ; —WpBpdTToSov,
OVK dve^rj TOV dSeXcfiov tov aavrov, 09 e^et TOV Aia irpoyovov, axnrep vio<i eK twv uvtcov
(nrep/xdTtov ykyovev kclI T779 auT^9 dva>dev kutu4
y9o\r;9, dX)C el ev TlVt TOiavTr} X^P^ KaT€Tdyr]<i
VTrepe^ovo'T), evdv<i Tvpavvov KaTaa-Trjcr€i<: aeavTov
; ov pLepLvrjCTT) Tt el Koi tcvcov dp)(ei,<; ; oti
(Tvyyevoiv, oti d8eX(f}(t)v (pvaei, oti tov Ato9
6 d-Troyovwv ; —'AW' covrjv avTcov e^fo, eKecvoc S' epov OVK e^ovaiv.—'Opd<; ttov ^Xerret,^ ; oti el<i tijv
98
BOOK I. XII. 33-xni. 5
as for body, they have released you ; and for property, death, life. Well, for what have they
made you accountable ? For the only thing that is under your control—the proper use of impressions.
Why, then, do you draw upon yourself that for which you are not responsible? This is to make
trouble for yourself.
CHAPTER XIII
How may each several thing he done acceptably
to the gods ? Now when someone asked him how it is possible
to eat acceptably to the gods, he said. If it is done
justly and graciously and fairly and restrainedly and
decently, is it not also done acceptably to the gods .' And when you have asked for warm water and the
slave does not heed you ; or if he does heed you but
brings in tepid water ; or if he is not even to be
found in the house, then to refrain from anger and
not to explode, is not this acceptable to the gods l*
—
How, then, can a man bear with such persons ?—
Slave, will you not bear with your own brother, who
has Zeus as his progenitor and is, as it were, a son born of the same seed as yourself and of the same
sowing from above ; but if you have been stationed
in a like position above others, will you forthwith set yourself up as a tyrant ? Do you not remember
what you are, and over whom you rule—that they
are kinsmen, that they are brothers by nature, that
they are the offspring of Zeus .'' —But I have a deed
of sale for them, and they have none for me.—Do
you see whither you bend your gaze, that it is to 99
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
'Yt]v, OTi ei<? TO ^dpadpov, ore ei? tou? Ta\at7rd)pov<;
TovTov<i v6fMov<i Toii^ Tcov vexpoiiv, eh Se rov<i twi'
deuiv ov ySXcTret? ;
tS'. "On TTiiPTas i<f>opd to delov
1 Yivdofxevov Si TLVO^, irSi'i civ tl^ TreKrdeit], ore CKaarov tmv utt' avrov TrparTOfievcov €cf)oparai
VTTO Tov deov, Ov 8oK€i aoi, e^7}, rjvMcrOai to. 2 TTiivTa ; —AoKct, €(f>i]. —Ti Se ; avfiTradelv ra
eTTLjeia roi<; ovpavioi^ ov BoKel aot ; —AoKel,
3 €(f>T]. —Tl66ev yap ovtq) Terayfievco^ Kaddrrep ck
irpocrTajfiaTO'; rov deov, orav €Keivo<; elTrrj TOt? ^VTOi<i dvOelv, dvdel, orav etirr] ^Xacrrdveiv, y8\aardvei,
orav CKijiipeiv tov Kapirov, eK^epei, orav
ireTralveLv, ireiTaivet,, orav irdXcv dirolSdWeiv Koi
(f)vWoppoelv Koi avrd eh avra avveiXovfxeva
e^' jJcTL'^ia? fieveiv koI dvairaveadai, p-evei 4 Koi avarraverai ; irodev Be tt/qo? ttjv av^y]cnv
Kol fM€ta)acv T?}9 (TeXrjV'tjf} kul Tr)V rov rfXiov
irpoaohov Koi d(f>o8ov ToaavTTj TrapaWayr) kuI
iirl rd evavria p,€Ta^oXT] tcov imyeicov OecopeiTai;
5 dWd Ta (f)VTd ^ p,ev koX tu r}p,eT€pa crcopaTa
ovTcof ivBeheTai Toh 6\oi<; Kal avinreirovdev, at
^ Stobaeus : <i>u\\a S.
^ This is the famous principle of avix-irdOeia (crvfnra6f7v and
ffvfJi-KficovBev in the text here), i.e., the physical unity of the cosmos in such a form that the experience of one part
necessarily affects every other. This doctrine, especially
popular with the Stoics, is essentially but a philosophic formulation of the vague ideas that underlie the practices of
BOOK I. XIII. 5-xiv. 5 the earth, that it is to the pit, that it is to these
wretched laws of ours, the laws of the dead, and
that it is not to the laws of the gods that you look ?
CHAPTER XIV
That the Deity oversees all men Now when someone asked him how a man could
be convinced that each thing which he does is under
the eye of God, Do you not think, he answered,
that all things are united in one?—I do, said the
other.—Very well, do you not think that what is on earth feels the influence ^ of that which is in
heaven }—I do, he replied. —For how else comes
it that so regularly, as if from God's command, when
He bids the plants flower, they flower, when He
bids them put forth shoots, they put them forth,
when He bids them bear their fruit, they bear it, when to ripen, they ripen ; when again He bids
them drop their fruit and let fall their leaves and
gather themselves together and remain quiet and
take their rest, they remain quiet and take their
rest ? And how else comes it that at the waxing and
waning of the moon and at the approach and
recession of the sun we see among the things that
are on earth so great an alteration and change to the
opposite ? But are the plants and our own bodies so
closely bound up with the universe, and do they
so intimately share its affections,^ and is not the
sympathetic magic. For the literature on this topic see Pease on Cicero's De Divinatione, ii. 34, where avix-K(x6fia is defined by Cicero as a coniunetio naturae et qiuisi eoncentus et eonserisus.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
6 i/rt»^ai S' al rjfieTepat, ov ttoXv irXeov ; aXV ai
yjrv^al fiev ovTw'i elalv ivSeBefievai xal avva<^ei^
rat Oeu) are avTov fiopia ovaat kol airoairdcr^aTa, ov 7ravTo<i 5' avTcbv KivrjfiaTO^ are oiKeiov koI
7 a-vfi(f)Vov^ 6 ^609 alaOdverai ; dWa av fiev irepl Tr/<? 6ela<i SioiK7]cr€co<; Kal irepX eKacrrov
T(ov 6eia>v,6[xov he kol irepl rcov dvdpayTrivcDv irpa'yfidrtov
ivdvfieladai, Svvaa-at /cal dfia fiev aiaOrjriKSi<i
diro fivplfov Trpayfidrcov Kiveladai, dfia 8e
Siavor]TiKco<;, dfia Be avyKaraOeTiKco^, rot? 5' dva8
VeV(TTLKOi<i ri e<f)€KTlK(0^, TUTTOU? Be TO(TOVTOV<; d<f)' ovrw ttoWmv Kal iroiKikoiv irpa'yfidraiv ev rfj aavTov
"^vj^f] (f>v\dTTei<i Kal dtr avrSnv KLVovfxevo'^ el<; iirivoLa^ 6/jioeiBei<; e/xTiTTTei"? rot? tt/ocuto)? TervTrioKoai
T€^i/a9 t' dXkrjv eV dWrj ^ koI fivrjfia<i diTO
9 fivpioiv Trpajfidrcov Biaam^ei'i' 6 Be Oe6<; ov^ ol6<i T ia-rl irdvra i<f>opdv Kal Trdaiv avfiirapeipai
10 Kal aTTo irdvTcov rivd icr^eiv BidBoaiv ; dWd
(fxari^eiv oi6<; r eariv o rjXio'i TrfKtKovrov fi€po<i
Tov TravTO?, oXiyov Be to d(f>d)Ti(Trov dTToiXiTrelv oaov olov T iire-x^eadai vtto <TKid<;, r}v rj yrj iroiet' 6 Be Kal TOV rjXiov avrov 7re7roir)KCt)<i Kal Trepidycop
fiepo<i OVT avrov /xiKpov &)? tt/jo? to 6\ov, ovTO<i B ov BvvaTai TrdvTcov aiaddvea-dai
;
» Schenkl : &k\i}v iir' &\\as S.
BOOK I. XIV. 5-IO
same' much more true of our own souls ? But if our
souls are so bound up with God and joined together
with Him, as being parts and portions of His being,
does not God perceive their every motion as being
a motion of that which is His own and of one body with Himself? And yet you have pwjwer to think about the divine dispensation and about each
several item among things divine, and at the same
time also about human affairs, and you have the
faculty of being moved by myriads of matters at the same time both in your senses and in your intelli- gence, and at the same time you assent to some,
while you dissent from others, or suspend judgement
about them ; and you guard in your own soul so many impressions derived from so many and various
matters, and, on being moved by these impressions,
your mind falls upon notions corresponding to the
impressions first made, and so from myriads of matters
you derive and retain arts, one after the other, and
memories. All this you do, and is God not able
to oversee all things and to be present with all and to have a certain communication from them all ? Yet the sun is capable of illuminating so large a
portion of the universe, and of leaving unilluminated
only the small space which is no larger than can be covered by the shadow that the earth casts ; and
is He who has created the sun, which is but a small
portion of Himself^ in comparison with the whole,
and causes it to revolve, is He not able to perceive
all things ?
* Chrysippus identified the Universe, of which the sun
is but a part, with God. See Cicero, De Natura Deorum,
ii. 38 f. 103
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
11 Aw eyo), (f)7)a(,v, ov Svva/xai rrdaiv afxa rovToi<;
irapoKoXovdelv. —Tovro 8e aoi koI Xeyet Tt9,
12 on larjv €)(^6t<; Svvafjbiv to) Au ; aW' ovv ovBev
rjTTOv Ka\ i-nirpoTTOv eKaaroi Trapearrjaev tov
kKaarov Sai/xova Koi irapeScoKev (pvXdaaeiv nvrov
avrq> koX tovtov aKOifirjTov Kol airapakoyicrrov.
13 TLVi <yap aWa> Kpelrrovi, koX iirifieXeaTepM (f)v- XaKi TrapeScoKev av ^ rjficou exacrTOv ; wo6\ orav
KXeKTrjre ra<i Ovpa^ koI gkoto^ evSov iroLrjarjre, 14 fiepvrjaOe p^rjSeTTOTe Xeyeiv on povoi ecrri' ov <yap
eare, dXX^ 6 6e6<; evhov ian koX 6 vp,er€po<i Saificov
iariv. koX tc<; tovtoi^ XP^''^ (pcoro^ eh to
16 ^Xeireiv ri TroieiTe ; rovrw tw deS> eSei koi vfj,a.<i ofivveiv opKov, olov ol arpariMTat tS> Kaiaapi.
aW' eKelvoi fiev rrjv fiiaOocfioplav XapBdvovre^
6p,vvovcriv iravrayv TrpoTifirjaeiv ttjv tov K.ai<Tapo<;
acoTTjpiav, vpi,el<i he Bt) ^ Toaovrayv xal ttjXckovtcov
rj^KoixevoL ovk op^oaere rj opoaavre^ ovk eppLSvelre ; 16 Kal Ti opLocreTe ;
p,T} direLdrjaetv prjSeTroTe p.rjS'
iyKuXicretv puTjBe p£p,^jreaOai tivi rS)v vtt' eKcivov
SeSopev(ov prjS^ uKovre^ iroii^aeiv n rj 'jreiaecrdai 17 TU)v dvajKacwv. 6poi6<i 7' o ^ 6pK0<i ovto<; eKecvqy;
eKcl p,ev opLvvovcTLv avTov p,r) Trponp.rjaeiv erepov,
ivravOa S' avT0v<i dirdvrwv.
' Suggested by Upton (after yiip Schweighauaer).
* Schenkl (5e 5)j ol von Wilamowitz) : S« 5e S.
' von Wilamowitz (-ye 6 Diels) : ye opnos S.
^ Compare Seneca, J?j9M<. 41, 2 : sacer intra nos spiritus sedet, malorwm bonorumqioe nostrorum observator ei custos, and
104
BOOK I. XIV. 11-17
And yet, says one, I cannot follow all these things
at one and the same time.—But does anyone go
so far as to tell you this, namely, that you possess a faculty which is equal to that of Zeus .'' Yet
none the less He has stationed by each man's
side as guardian his particular genius,^—and has
committed the man to his care,—and that too a guardian who never sleeps and is not to be beguiled.
For to what other guardian, better and more careful,
could He have committed each one of us? Wherefore,
when you close your doors and make darkness
within, remember never to say that you are alone,
for you are not alone ; nay, God is within, and your
own genius is within. And what need have they
of light in order to see what you are doing ? Yes,
and to this God you also ought to swear allegiance,
as the soldiei-s do to Caesar. They are but hirelings,
yet they swear that they will put the safety of
Caesar above everything ; and shall you, indeed, who
have been counted worthy of blessings so numerous
and so great be unwilling to swear, or, when you
have sworn, to abide by your oath ? And what shall you swear .^ Never to disobey under any circumstances,
never to prefer charges, never to find fault with anything that God has given, never to let your
will rebel when you have either to do or to suffer something that is inevitable. Can the oath of the
soldiers in any way be compared with this of ours .'' Out there men swear never to prefer another in honour above Caesar ; but here we swear to prefer
ourselves in honour above everything else.
especially Menander, Epitr. 881 ff., with Capps's note. Almost exactly the same idea appears also in Marcus
Aarelius, V. 27. los
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
16 . Tt eTrayyiWeTai (f)i\o(TO(f>La ;
1 Xv/x^ovXevofievov riv6<i, ttw? tov d8€X(f>bv ireiar] 2 fiTjKeTi, ;^aXe7rft>9 avTa> e)(et.v, Ovk eTrayyiWeTat,
e<j)'q, (j)iXoao(f)ia tcov ckto^ tl irepLiroiriaeiv tm
av6p(oiT(p' el Be p,r], e^a> to rrj<i t'Sta? v\r)<i
avahe^eraL?- a>? yap t€Ktovo<; vXt) to. ^vXa,
avhpLavTOTTOLOv ')(^a\K6'i, ovTco<i Tr]<; irepl ^iov
3 re^vr}^ vKrj 6 ^io<i avrov eKacrrov.—Tt ovv 6 tov
dSeXcpov ; —YiaXiv T7J<i avrov ixeivov Te;^^?;? icnlv,
7rp6<i Be TT}v arjv rSiv eKro^ iariv, o/xoiov dypS),
ofioiov vyeia, o/jloiov evBo^ia. tovtcov B' ovBev
4 eirayyeWeTai (f>i\.0(T0(f)La. " ev irdar) TrepicrTaaei
Trfp-qao) TO rjye/iioviKov Kara (pvcriv e^ov."—To
5 rivo<;
;
—" To eKelvov, ev c5 elfiL"—!!&)? ovv
eKelv6<i fxoi p,r) opyii^rjTai
;
—" ^epe fiot eKelvov
KaKelvo) epSi, (roi Be irepX Trj<; eKelvov 6pyi]<s
ovBev e^at \eyeiv."
6 EtVoj'To? Be TOV (Tvp,^ovX€vo/j,€vov oTi ToOto
^r}T(o, TTW? dv eKelvov kuI firj BiaWaaaopevov
7 KUTu <f)vaiv exotpi, OvBev, €(f)7), twv fieydXcov
d(f>VQ) ylverac, oirov ye ovB^ o y8oT/)U9 ovBe crvKov. dv fiot vvv \eyr]<; otl " dekw avKOV^^ diroKpivovp.al
(TOi OTL " y^povov Set.' d<^e<^ dvOrjcTrj Trpayrov, eiTU
8 trpo^dXr) TOV KapiTov, etra Treiravd^. eiTa avKr}<;
' Reiske : avt^erai S.
1 The soul of man, as feeling and thinking, often equivalent
to " reason," but not exclusively intellectual. See Bonhoffer,
Epictet und die Stoa, i. 9 flf. io6
BOOK I. XV. 1-8
CHAPTER XV
What does philosophy profess ? When someone consulted Epictetus as to how he
could persuade his brother to cease being angry
with him, he replied, Philosophy does not profess
to secure for man any external possession. Otherwise
it would be undertaking something that lies outside its proper subject-matter. For as wood
is the material of the carpenter, bronze that of
the statuary, just so each man's own life is the
subject-matter of the art of living. —Well, what
about my brother's life ?—That again is the subjectmatter
of his own art of living, but with respect
to your art of living it comes under the category
of externals, like a farm, like health, like good
repute. Philosophy promises none of these things,
but rather, " In every circumstance I will keep
the governing principle ^ in a state of accord with
nature."—Whose governing principle?—"His in whom I am."—How, then, shall I keep my brother
from being angry at me ?—Bring him to me and I will tell him, but I have nothing to say to you on
the subject of his anger.
And when the man who was consulting him said. What I seek to know is this, how, even if my brother
refuses to be reconciled with me, I may yet be in
accord with nature, Epictetus replied : Nothing great comes into being all at once ; why, not even does the
bunch of grapes, or a fig. If you say to me now, " I want a fig," I shall answer, "That requires time."
Let the tree blossom first, then put forth its fruit,
and finally let the fruit ripen. Now although the
107
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
fjikv Kapiro'i ac^vw koI fiia wpa ov reXeiovrai,
yv(ojjir]<; 8 avOpconov Kapirov de\eL<; ovtci)<; St" oXljov Kal €VKoXa)<i KTijaaadai ; firjB^ av eyoo <TOi \e<y<0 irpoahoKa.
tr'. Ile/ol rrpovoia<;
1 M^ davpd^CT el TOt<i pev aWoi<: f&)0i9 ra tt/do? TO atopa eroipa yeyovev, ov povov Tpo(f>al icai, TTOpLa, dWa koI koltt) koI ro p.r) heiaOai viroSrjpdTcov,
pr) VTToaTpcopidrwv, p^rj eaOfjro<;, rjp€i<i 8e
2 irdvTmv tovtcov TrpooSeopeda. to. yap ovk avra>v
^vcKa, dWa TTyoo? vTTfjpecnav yeyovora ovk
eXvaireXei irpoaheopeva dWcov TreTroirjKevai. 3 eTrel opa olov av ^ r)v rjpd<i (f)povTi,^€t.v prj irepl
avTcov povov dWa Kal irepX rSiv Trpo^drcov Kal
rSiv 6v(i)v, 7rco9 €vBvai]Tai Kal ttw? viroS^aiirai,
4 TTto? <f>dyr}, ttw? Trir]. aX,X,' axnrep oi aTparicorai
€TOip,oL elai Tft) (TTpaTTjyo) viroBeSepevoi evBeSvpevoL
Q)TTXi<Tpevoi, el S' eSet 7repi€p)(6pevov rov
^(^LXiapy^^ov VTToSeiv rj ivSveiv rov^ ^tXtoy?, Seivov av Tjv, ovTO) Kal rf <}>va'i^ TreTroitjKe ra rrpof
virripeaiav yeyovora eroipa irapeaKevaa-pLeva
5 p,r]Bepia<; 67rt/ieX,eta9 €ti irpocrSeopeva. ovrco^ ev TraiSlov piKpov Kal pd^hat ekavvei ra Trpo^ara,
6 Nvv 8' r)pel<i d(f)evTe<; iirl rovroL<i evy^apicTTelv,
on prj Kal avriav rrjv larjv eirtpbeXeiav inripeXov-
' Added by von Wilamowitz. , lo8
BOOK I. XV. 7-xvi. 6
fruit of even a fig-tree is not brought to perfection all at once and in a single hour, would you still seek to secure the fruit of a man's mind in so short a while
and so easily ? Do not expect it, not even if I should
tell you so myself.
CHAPTER XVI
Of providence
Marvel not that the animals other than man have
furnished them, ready prepared by nature, what
pertains to their bodily needs—not merely food and
drink, but also a bed to lie on,—and that they have no need of shoes, or bedding, or clothing, while we
are in need of all these things. For in the case of
animals, born not for their own sake, but for service, to have created them in need of other things was not beneficial. Why, consider what it would
be for us to have to take thought not for merely
ourselves, but also for our sheep and our asses, how they are to be clothed and shod, how they are
to find food and drink. But just as soldiers appear
before their general, all ready for service, shod,
clothed and armed, and it would be shocking if the
colonel had to go around and equip his regiment
with shoes or uniforms ; so also nature has made
animals, which are born for service, ready for use, equipped, and in need of no further attention.
Ginsequently one small child with a rod can drive a
flock of sheep.
But as it is, we first forbear to give thanks for these beasts, because we do not have to bestow upon
them the same care as we require for ourselves, and
Z09
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
7 fieda, e<f avrol^ ejKaXovfiev tw deS). KaLroi, vrj
TOP Ata Kal T0U9 ^eou? e^ tuu jeyovoTcov airijpKei
TT/oo? TO aladiaOai Trj<i Trpovoia^; tm ye aihrjfiovt, 8 Koi ev')(^apiar(p. koI ixrj fiot vvv to. fieyaXa' avro
TOVTO TO i/c 7roa9 yaXa yevvaadai Kal ck yakaKTO<i
rvpov Kol €K Bepfiaro'i epta Tt9 icmv 6
Tre7roi,r)KQ)<i ravra rj iTrivevoT)K(o<i; "ovSk eh" t^-qaiv.
CO /leyaXr)^: apaicrOrjaia^ fcal avat.(T^vvTla<;. 9 "A^e d(f)Ot)fi€v ra epya t?}? (f)vaeQ}<;, ra irdpepya
10 avTri<i deaaoofjieda. fit] ri d-^prjaroTepov TpL')(oiv
TMV €ttI yeveiov / rt ovv ,' ov avve'^prjcraro Kal
ravTai^ co? /xaXiara TrpeirovTWi iSvvaro ,* ov
11 huKpivev hi avT(ov to appev Kal to OrfKv ; ovk
6v6v<i fxaKpoOev K€Kpayev rj/bLotv eKdcTTOv rj <f>vai<; " dvrip elfxr outco fioi irpoaepxov, ovtw fioi XdXei,
12 dXKo firjSev ^rjTei' ihov to. avfi^oXa" ; irdXiv iirX t5)v yvvaiKcov cocnrep iv (fxovjj tl iyKaTejxi^ev
diraXdiTepoVy ovtco^ Kal ra? Tpi')(a<i d<f)€i\ev. ov'
dW' dhidKpiTOV ehei to ^wov d'Tro\eL(^dr)vai Kal
13 KT}pvacyeiv eKacxTov rjfioyv OTi " dvrjp elfii." ttw? Se KaXov TO avfi^oXov Kal eviTpeTTe<i Kal (re/iivov,
TTOaO) KoXXlOV TOV ToiiV dXeKTpVOVCOV X6(f)0U, TTOCTft) 14 fieyaXoTrpeTTeaTcpov tt}? ^atV?;? tmv Xcovtcov. Bid
TOVTO eBet aco^eiv ra avfi^oXa tov deov, eBei avTa
fxrj KaTairpoieaOai, /jltj avyyjdv ocrov i<f>^ eavTol<;
TCb yevr) rd Bcrjprjfieva,
HO
BOOK I. XVI. 6-14
then proceed to complain against God on our own
account 1 Yet, by Zeus and the gods, one single
gift of nature would suffice to make a man who is reverent and grateful perceive the providence of God.
Do not talk to me now of great matters : take the mere fact that milk is produced from grass, and
cheese from milk, and that wool grows from skin
—
who is it that has created or devised these things } " No one," somebody says. Oh, the depth of man's
stupidity and shamelessness
!
Come, let us leave the chief works of nature, and
consider merely what she does in passing. Can
anything be more useless than the hairs on a chin ? Well, what then ? Has not nature used even these
in the most suitable way possible ? Has she not by
these means distinguished between the male and the
female ? Does not the nature of each one among us
cry aloud forthwith from afar, " I am a man ; on this
understanding approach me, on this understanding
talk with me ; ask for nothing further ; behold the
signs " ? Again, in the case of women, just as nature has mingled in their voice a certain softer note,
so likewise she has taken the hair from their chins.
Not so, you say ; on the contrary' the human animal
ought to have been left without distinguishingfeatures,
and each of us ought to proclaim by word of mouth,
" I am a man." Nay, but how fair and becoming
and dignified the sign is ! How much more fair than
the cock's comb, how much more magnificent than the
lion's mane ! Wherefore, we ought to preserve the
signs which God has given ; we ought not to throw
them away ; we ought not, so far as in us lies, to
confuse the sexes which have been distinguished in
this fashion.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
15 Tavra fjLOva icrrlv epya i(f) r^^wv Tr}<; irpovoias ; Kol Tt? e^apK€i X.0709 6/xotft)9 avra iiraiveaai rj irapaa-TTJa-ai ; el yap vovv el'XPP'^v, aWo ri eBec
rjfid^ TToieiv Kal tcoivfj xal Ihia rj vfivelv to Oelov
16 Kol eixpT)fieiv Kal e'Tre^ep')(ea6aL Ta<i ')(api,Ta^ ; ovk
eSec Kal aKciTnovTa'; Kal dpovvra^ Kal icrdiovra'i
aheiv TOP v/xvov top eh tov debv ; " fieya<; 6 de6<;, 17 OTi fjfjuv Trapecr^ev opyava TavTa Bi o)v ttjv yrjv
epyaaofxeda' fieya^ 6 Oe6<;, otl ')(etpa^ SeScoKev, oti
KaTciTTocnv, OTi KoiXCav, oti av^ecrdat XeXrjOoTco^;,
18 OTi KudevhovTa^ dvaTrveiv" TavTa e0' eKucTTov
e<f)v/Mveiv eSei Kal tov fieyicrTov Kal OeioTaTov
VfjLvov ecfiufiveiv, oti ttjv Bvva/jLiveScoKev T-qv irapaKoXovdrjTiKTjv
TOVTOt<i Kal 68a> ')(^pr]<TTt,Krjv. Tt
19 ovv ; eTrel 01 ttoWoI cLTTOTeTv^Xwade, ovk eBei Tiva elvai tov TavTrjv eKirXijpovvTa ttjv ')((i}pav
Kal VTrep TrdvTcov ahovTa ^ tov vjxvov tov eh tov
20 deov ; tI yap aSXo Svva/jiai yepcov ;^&)A.o9 et fJLrj v/xvetv TOV deov ; el yovv drjBcbv rjfxrjv, eTToiovv to,
T^9 dtjBovo';, el kvkvo<;, to, tov kvkvov, vvv Be
21 XoyLKo^ elfif vfivetv fie Bet tov deov. tovto fiov
TO epyov ecTTLv, iroiS) avTO ouB eyKaTaXei-^w ttjv
Ta^iv TavTTjv, e'^' oaov dv BiBcoTai, Kal v/jLd<; iirl ttjv avTr)v TavTrjv mBrjv TrapaKaXo).
i^. "Oti dvayKala ra XoyiKa
1 'ErreiS^ X070? ccttIv 6 BiapOpcov Kal e^epya^ofievo<;
Ta Xonrd, eBei S* avTOV fii) dBuipdpcoTOV
* Schweighauser : SiaSSvTa S. 113
1
BOOK I. XVI. 15-XV11. I Are these the only works of Providence in us?
Nay, what language is adequate to praise them all or bring them home to our minds as they deserve ? Why, if we had sense, ought we to be doing anything
else, publicly and privately, than hymning and
praising the Deity, and rehearsing His benefits?
Ought we not, as we dig and plough and eat, to sing
the hymn of praise to God ? " Great is God, that
He hath furnished us these instruments wherewith
we shall till the earth. Great is God, that He hath
given us hands, and power to swallow, and a belly,
and power to grow unconsciously, and to breathe
while asleep." This is what we ought to sing on
every occasion, and above all to sing the greatest and
divinest hymn, that God has given us the faculty to comprehend these things and to follow the path of
reason. What then ? Since most of you have
become blind, ought there not to be someone to
fulfil this office for you, and in behalf of all sing the
hymn of praise to God ? Why, what else can I, a lame old man, do but sing hymns to God ? If, indeed, I were a nightingale, I should be singing as a nightingale ; if a swan, as a swan. But as it is, I am a rational being, therefore I must be singing
hymns of praise to God. This is my task ; I do it, and will not desert this post, as long as it may be
given me to fill it ; and I exhort you to join me in
this same song.
CHAPTER XVn
That the art of reasoning is indispensable
Since it is reason that analyzes and perfects all else,
and reason itself ought not to remain unanalyzed,
"3
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
2 etvai., VTTO tlvo<; hiapOpwOfi ; SrjXov yap on rj v(f)' avTov rj VTT aWoV' ij toi \oyo<; icrriv eKelvo^i ?/ aA,\o TL Kpelaaov earai rov \6yov, oirep dSvvaTOV.
3 €i \0709, eKelvov ttuXiv rt'? SiapOpoocrec ; el yap
avro<i eavTov, Svvarai Kal ovro<i. el dWov
oer)(TOfieda, aweipov earai rovro Kal aKaTuXrjKTov.
4 " Nai,^ afOC iireiyei, jjuaWov depaireveiv " koI to, ofioia. OeXeL<; ovv irepl eKelvcov uKoveiv ; aKove.
6 dW' dv fioi \eyTj<; on " ovk olSa irorepov d\r]0a)<;
r) yjrevSa)^ StaXeyrj,^^ kuv n Kar d/j,<f)L^o'\ov (fxovrjv
eiTTO) Kal \eyT]s p-OL " Sidarc^ov,^' ovk en dve^op,ai
6 (Tov, dW. epS) (Toi " dW iirelyei p,dXX,ov." Bia
rovTO yap otp,ai irpordacrovcnv to, XoyiKa,
Kaddirep t^? fieTp7](r€co<i rov ctltov irpoTdaaop^ev
7 rrjv tov fieTpov eiriaKey^iv. av he p,rj SiaXd^oop^ev
irpoiTOv rl ecrn p,68io^ p.r)8e hia\dj3(op^v irpSiTov
ri ecrn ^vy6<i, ttm^ en p,eTprjaai rt rj crrfjaai
8 Bvvr)a6p.eOa ; evravOa ovv to tmv dXkcov KpiTjjpiov
Kal Si 01) rdWa KarapavdaveTat p,T) KaTap,ep,a6rjK0Te<; prjS' i^Kpi,j3Q)K0Te<i BvvT]a6p,e6d
Ti t6)v dWcov dKpi^oxrat Kal KaTapuOeiv ; Kal
9 TTw? olov Te ; " vat- aXX' 6 poSio^ ^v\ov earrl Kal
10 aKapnov." dWd p^eTp-qriKOv airov. " Kal to.
* Upton : elvou S.
^ Reason, therefore, can be analyzed only by itself.
* The course of the argument is highly condensed here,
but this is the plain sense of the passage.
» A Roman dry measure, slightly less than half a bushel. 114
BOOK I. XVII. i-io
wherewithal shall it be analyzed ? Why, clearly,
either by itself, or by something else. This latter is assuredly either reason, or it will prove to be something
else superior to reason, which is impossible. If it be reason, who again will analyze that reason ? For
if it analyzes its own self, the reason with which we
started can do as much. If we are going to require
something else at each step, our process will be
endless and unceasing.
^
*' Yes," says someone, " but the cure (of the
decisions of our will) is a much more pressing need
(than the study of logic)," ^ and the like. Do you
then wish to hear about this other matter ? Very
well, listen. But if you say to me, " I do not know
whether your argument is true or false," and, if I use some ambiguous term, and you should then say, " Distinguish," I shall bear with you no longer, but
shall tell you, "
' Nay, but there is a much more
pressing need.' " This is the reason, I suppose, why
the Stoic philosphers put Logic first, just as in the
measuring of grain we put first the examination of
the measure. And if we do not define first what a modius 3 is, and do not define first what a scale is, how shall we be able to proceed with measuring
or weighing anything ? So, in the field of our present
enquiry, if we have neglected the thorough knowledge
and intellectual mastery of our standard of
judgement for all other things, whereby they come
to be known thoroughly, shall we ever be able to
attain intellectual mastery and thorough knowledge
of the rest of the world? And how could we
possibly } " Yes,'' we are told, " but the modius is made out of wood and bears no fruit." True, but it
is something with which we can measure grain.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
\ojiKa aKapird etni" koX irepX tovtov fiev oyjrofieOa. el S" ovv koX tovto Bolt] rt?, eKelvo
airapKel on tmv aWcov earl Sia/cpiTiKa Ka
iTTiaKeirriKa koI ax; av TL<t elrrrot fieTprjTiKa ku
11 arariKd. rt? Xeyei ravra ; fi6vo<i Kpvcrnnroi; kuI
12 Zrjvoov Kal KXedi'dr)'; ; ^ AvTicTdevri<i 8' ov Xeyet
Kal Tt9 ecTTLv 6 <y€ypa(l)Q)^ on " dp'^^rj naiheuaew'i rj TMv ovofxaTdov cVtV/feA/rtv "; S(OKpdTr)<i 8' ov Xiyei,
Kal irepl tlvo<; 'ypd(f>€i ^€vo(f)cbv, on r)p-^ero diro
TTJ^ rS)v ovofidrcov e'ni(TKe^ea)<i, tC crrj/jLaivei
CKacTTOv ; 13 'Ap ovv TOVTO ecTTi TO fxeya koL to davfiaaTOv,
vorjaai XpvaiTnrov rj i^rjyijaaaBai ; Kal Tt? \eyei
14 TOVTO ; Tt ovv TO davfiacTTOv ccttiv ; vorjaai to
^ovXrjfia tt}? (pvcreco^;. rt ovv ; avTO'i hid
(xeavTOv irapaKoXovdei'; ," Kal Tivo<; ert XP^^<^^' e%6f9 ; el yap dXrjde^ eaTi to iravTa^ aArovxa?
dfiapTdveiv, av 8e KaTa/j,efJidOr]Ka<i ttjv dXtjOeiav,
15 dvdyKr) ae -rjSrj KaTopdovv. dXXd vrj Aia ov TrapaKoXovOco t& ^ovXtjfxaTi t?)? (f>vaeo)(;. Ti'? ovv e^rjyeiTai avTo ; Xeyovatv oti Xpvannro<;.
16 ep)(^o/jLai KOI eTri^rjTO) Tt Xeyei ovto<; 6 €^77777x7)9
Trj<i (f)va€Q)^. dpxofuii /^^ voeiv tl Xeyei, ^rjTco
Tov e^rjyovfievov. " iSe iTriaKeyjrai, ttw? tovto
17 XeycTai, Kaddnep el 'Vco/jLalaTi.^^ iroia ovv ivddK
o<^pv<i tov i^Tjyovfievov ; ovB" avTov Xpvaiirrrov
1 See Xenophon, Memorabilia, IV. 6, i. * The famous dictum of Socrates, formulated as, " No
man errs voluntarily,'" in Plato, Protagoras, 345 D. 116
BOOK I. XVII. 10-17
" Logic also bears no fruit." Now as for this state- ment we shall see later ; but if one should grant even this, it is enough to say in defence of Logic
that it has the power to discriminate and examine
everything else, and. as one might say, to measure and weigh them. Who says this ? Only Chrysippus
and Zeno and Cleanthes ? Well, does not Antisthenes
say it? And who is it that wrote, "The
beginning of education is the examination of terms " ? Does not Socrates,^ too, say the same thing ? And
of whom does Xenophon write, that he began with
the examination of terms, asking about each, " What
does it mean ? "
Is this, then, your great and admirable achievement—the
ability to understand and to interpret
Chrysippus ? And who says that ? What, then, is your admirable achievement ? To understand the
will of nature. V^ery well ; do you understand it all by yourself? And if that is the case, what more do
you need? For if it is true that "all men err involuntarily," ^ and you have learned the truth, it must needs be that you are doing right already.
But, so help me Zeus, I do not comprehend the will of nature. Who, then, interprets it? Men say,
Chrysippus. I go and try to find out what this
interpreter of nature says. I begin not to understand
what he says, and look for the man who can
interpret him. " Look and consider what this
passage means," says the interpreter, "just as if it were in Latin ! "^ What place is there here, then,
for pride on the part of the interpreter? Why,
* Epictetus seems to be placing himself in the position of one of his Roman pupils, who would understand Chrysippus more easily if translated into Latin. 117
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
8iKaLco<;, €1 fjbovov i^rjyelrai to fiovXrjfia T'^?
(f)vcr€co<i, auT09 8' ovk d/coXovder TToaw TrXiov
18 Tov cKetvov i^rjyov/xivov ; ovBe yap ^pvaLinrov
')^peiav e^^ofiev Bt aurov, dX)C Xva 7rapaKo\ovdrjaeofiev
rf) cjyvaei. ovBe yap tov Ovtov Si avTov, dW' OTL 8i i/ceivov KaTavoijaeiv olo/xeOa
TO. fiiXkovTa Kul cnjfMaivofieva viro tcov deo)v, 19 ovhe T(ov aTT\dyy(y(i)v hi avTa, aXk* oti Bi €Keiva>v crr]p,aiveTai, ovBe tov KopaKa davfid^o/xev
rj Trjv Kopoovrjv, dWa tov deov arjfialvovTa Sid
TOVTCOV.
20 ^'Ep)(^o/Mat TOivvv €7rl tov i^rfyy^Trjv tovtov Kal
dvT'qv Kal Xiyco oti " €7rl(TKe\frai, /not tu (T'jT\dy)(ya,
21 Tt /iot arjfiaiveTat." Xa^cov /cal dvaTTTv^a^; eKelva
i^r^yeiTai OTI "dvdpwrre, Trpoaipeatv e;^et9 aKcoKvTov
(pvcrec Kol dvavdyKaaTov. tovto ivTuvda iv toi^
22 (T'n\dy')(yoL<i ykypaiXTai. Set^o} aoi avTO irpc^Tov
iirX TOV crvyKaTadeTLKOv tottov. fxri Ttq ae fccoXvaai
SvvaTat eTTivevcrai dXridel ; ovSe et?. p^rj ti? ere dvayKdaai SvvaTat TrapaSe^aadat to yfrevSo^ ; ovSs
23 elt. 6pd<; oti iv tovtw t5> totto) to irpoaipeTiKov
e%6t9 aKcoXvTOV dvavdyKacxTOV dirapaTToSiCTOv ; 24 dye eVi Se tov ope/cTiKov Kal opprjTiKov aXXw^
e%et / Kal ti? opprjv VLKrjcraL SvvaTai rj dXXr) 6pp.r)
;
Ti9 S' ope^iv Kal eKKXiaiv rj dXXrj ope^i^ Kai ckkXl26
0"t9 ;'' " dv pot," <f)r]<Ti,, Trpocrdyr) OavdTOV c^o^ov,
dvayKu^ei p,e" " ov to irpoaayop^evov, dXX' oti
SoK€i aoi KpetTTOV elvai Troirjaai ti tovtwv rj Ii8
BOOK I. XVII. 17-25
there is no just place for pride even on the part
of Chrysippus, if he merely interprets the will of
nature, but himself does not follow it ; how much
less place for pride, then, in the case of his interpreter
I For we have no need of Chrysippus on his own account, but only to enable us to follow nature.
Xo more have we need of him who divines through
sacrifice, considered on his own account, but simply
because we think that through his instrumentality
we shall understand the future and the signs given
by the gods ; nor do we need the entrails on their
own account, but only because through them the
signs are given ; nor do we admire the crow or the
raven, but God, who gives His signs through them.
Wherefore, I go to this interpreter and diviner
and say, " Examine for me the entrails, and tell me
what signs they give." The fellow takes and spreads
them out and then interprets : " Man, you have a moral purpose free by nature from hindrances and
constraint. This stands written here in these entrails.
I will prove you that first in the sphere of
assent. Can anyone prevent you from assenting to truth .'' No one at all. Can anyone force you to accept the false ? No one at all. Do you see that
in this sphere you have a moral purpose free from
hindrance, constraint, obstruction ? Come, in the
sphere of desire and choice is it otherwise ? And
what can overcome one impulse but another impulse ? And what can overcome one desire or aversion but
another desire or aversion ? " " But," says someone,
" if a person subjects me to the fear of death, he compelsme."
"No, it is not what you are subjected to that
impels you, but the fact that you decide it is better
for you to do something of the sort than to die. 119
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
26 airodavetv. troKtv ovv to aov 86y/xa ere ^vdyxa27
<T€V, Tovr €(TTi TTpoaipecTiv Trpoaipeat^. el yap
TO tSiov p,epo<i, r)plv eSco/cev aTroa7rdaa<i 6 Oeo^,
vir* avTOv rj vrr' aXKov tiv6<; kcoXvtop t) avayKacTov
KaTecTKevaKei, ovKeTt av rjv deo<; ovS" 28 eTrefMeXeiTO rjpLOiv ov Set Tpoirov. TavTa evpiaKca,^^
(f>r)aLV, " ev TO?"? lepol^. tuvto, croc arip,alveTai.
iav 6eKri<i, eXeuOepo<i er edv deXr)<;, pbejx-^rj
ovheva, iyKaXeaei<i ovSevl, irdvTa kuto, yv(t}p,r}v 29 ecTTai afia Trfv arjv kul ttjv tov deov^' 8id
TavTTjv TT)v fiai'Teiav epyojxat, inl tov Ovttjv
TOVTOv Kai TOV (f)iXo(TO(f)ov, ovK avTov dav/j,daa<;
€V€Kd ye TTJ<i i^rjyrjaeco^, dXXd ixeiva a i^TjyetTai.
IT}'. "On ov Bel "X^aXeiraiveiv tok dfiapTavo/xivots
1 E/ dXride<i eaTL to vtto tcov (f)iXoa6(f)Q)v Xeyop,€vov
OTi Trdcriv dvOpcoiroi^ pbia dp)^7], xaOdvep tov
(TvyKaTadeadai to Tradelv oti vndpx^t koI tov
dvavevaat to iraOelv oti oup^; UTrap^et koI vtj Ata TOV eiriayeiv to iradelv oti dSrjXov ecrTiv, 2 ovTa><; koL tov op/xrjaai eVt ti to iradelv oti ifiol avp.(j)epei, d/j,^')(^avov 8' dXXo /xev Kpiveiv to
(rvp,(f>epov, dXXov 8' opeyeoOai kuI aXXo fiev Kpiveiv Kudrj/cov, ctt' dXXo 8e oppav, ti €TI TOt<?
* It is not known just what persons are here referred to, but the doctrine that feeling {irdOos) is a kind of judgement
(Kplffis) or opinion (5({|a) is common among the Stoics. See Bonhciffer, Epiktet und die Stoa, I. 265 S,, and on the
general argument in this chapter, p. 276 f. 120
BOOK I, XVII. 25-xviii. 2 Once morCj then, it is the decision of your own will which compelled you, that is, moral purpose compelled
moral purpose. For if God had so constructed
that part of His own being which He has taken
from Himself and bestowed upon us, that it could
be subjected to hindrance or constraint either from
Himself or from some other. He were no longer
God, nor would He be caring for us as He ought.
This is what I find," says the diviner, "in the sacrifice.
These are the signs vouchsafed you. If you
will, you are free ; if you will, you will not have to blame anyone, or complain against anyone ; everything
will be in accordance with what is not merely
your own will, but at the same time the will of God."
This is the prophecy for the sake of which I go to
this diviner—in other words, the philosopher,—not
admiring him because of his interpretation, but
rather the interpretation which he gives.
CHAPTER XVni
ThtU we ought not to he angry with the erring
If what the philosophers * say is true, that in all men thought and action start from a single source,
namely feeling—as in the case of assent the feeling
that a thing is so, and in the case of dissent the
feeling that it is not so, yes, and, by Zeus, in the case of
suspended judgement the feeling that it is uncertain,
so also in the case of impulse towards a thing, the
feeling that it is expedient for me and that it is impossible
to judge one thing expedient and yet desire
another, and again, to judge one thing fitting, and
yet be impelled to another—if all this be true, why
VOL. I. F 121
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
3 TToWot? ')(^a\eTralvoiJ,ev ; —KXeTrrai, (^rjo-'tv, elcrl Kol XcoTToZvTai. —Tt iari to KKeinai, koX Xwtto8vTai
; TTeTrXdvrjvrai irepX ayadoiv Koi KaKwv.
4 ^aXeTraiveiv ovv Set avroif rj eXeelv avTov<; ; dXXa
Bel^ov TTjv irXdvrjv Kol oyjrei. ttco? dcplaTavrai roov dfiapTrjfidTcov. dv he firj ^XeTTWaiv, ovhev e^of-
(Tiv dvcorepou rov 8okovvto<; avrol^.
5 ToVTOV ovv TOV Xrj(TTr)V koI tovtov tov /XOf^OV
6 ovK eSet dTroXcoXevai ; —M7;Sa//.(y9, aX,V eKeivo
fidXXov " TOVTOV TOV TreirXavrifxevov kol e^r/TraTy]-
fjb€vov irepl Toiiv fxeyicTTwv koI d7roT€TV(j)X(o/u,evov ov Trjv oyjni' ttjv SiaKpiTiKrjv tmv XevKOiv koi
fxeXdvcov, dXXd Tr}V yvoo/jLrjv ttjv BiaKpiTCKrjv tmv
dyadcov koI twv KUKSiv fir] drroXXvvaL ; " Kdi> ovTa><;
7 Xeyjji;, ryvcoar) ttco? dTrdvdpoiTTOv iaTiv o Xeyeis Kal
OTl eK€LVfp OpbOlOV " TOVTOV OVV TOV TV(pX6v fit) 8 diToXXvvaL Kol tov Kcocpov ;
' el ydp p^ejiaTrj ^Xd^y
r) TOiv fieyiCTTcov dirtoXeid eaTiv, fiiyiaTOv ^ 6' iv
e/ca<7Tft) irpoaipecTL^ oXa Set xal tovtov <TTepeTai
9 Tt9, Tt eVi ')(^aXe'iraiveL<; avTw ; dvOpcoTre, el ae Bei irapd (pvaiv iirl rot? dXXoTploi^ KaKot<; BiutlOeaOai,
iXeei avTov fia-XXov rj /uaer a<pe<i tovto to
10 irpocTKOTTTiKov KoX fxiarjTLKov ixrj elcreveyKj)^^ Ta9
(f}(ovd<; TavTa<i a<; ol iroXXol twv (fyiXo'^oyovvTcov ^ " TOVTOV^ ovv TOV^ KUTapdTOVi Kal jJLlapOV'^ 11 fX(opov^.^" eaTco' ai) Trco^i ttot uTreaoipcoOj]^ dcf)VQ)
^ i.vdi\(ia. e<TTiv, fieyiarov, supplied by Schenkl.
* Mowat : i ttjjj S.
' Schenkl: (p raiv S.
* Sutiplied by Capps for a lacuna of about five letters in iS". 122
BOOK I. XVIII. 2-1
1
are we any longer angry with the multitude ? —"They
are thieves," says someone, " and robbers."—What do
you mean by " thieves and robbers? " They have simplv
gone astray in questions of good and evil. Ought
we, therefore, to be angry with them, or rather pity
them ? Only show them their error and you will see how quickly they will desist from their mistakes.
But if their eyes are not opened, they have nothing
superior to their mere opinion.
Ought not this brigand, then, and this adulterer to be put to death ? you ask. Not at all, but vou should
ask rather, " Ought not this man to be put to death
who is in a state of error and delusion al)out the
greatest matters, and is in a state of blindness, not,
indeed, in the vision which distinguishes between
white and black, but in the judgement which dis- tinguishes between the good and the evil?" And
if you put it this way, you will realize how inhuman
a sentiment it is that you are uttering, and that it
is just as if you should say, "Ought not this blind
man, then, or this deaf man to be put to death ? " For if the loss of the greatest things is the greatest
harm that can befall a man, while the greatest thing
in each man is a right moral purpose, and if a man
is deprived of this very thing, what ground is left for you to be angry at him ? Why, man, if you
must needs be affected in a way that is contrary to nature at the misfortunes of another, pity him rather,
but do not hate him : drop this readiness to take
offence and this spirit of hatred ; do not introduce
those words which the multitude of the censorious use: "Well, then, these accursed and abominable
fools ! " Very well ; but how is it that you have
so suddenly been converted to wisdom that you are 123
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(ocTTe dX\oi<; /j,copoi<; ^ ')(a\€7rb<; el ; Sia t'l ovv ^aXeTTaivofiev
; on ra^; {/Xa? Oavfid^o/nev, wv rjfj,d^ a(f)aipovvTai. eirei rot, fir) davfia^e aov rd lfj,dria
Kal Tft) KXeirrrj ov ')(a\e7rai,v€i<;' firj Oavfia^e to
KdXko^ Tr^9 yvvaiKo<; Kal tw fioi^m ov )(a\e'TralveL<i. 12 fyvwOi OTL K\eTnri<i Kal /xoi-^^^o^ ev toI<; crot<i roirov
ovK e')(6i, ev he rot? dWorpioL<i Kal toi<; ovk eVl trot. TavTa dv d(f>f)<; Kal irapd /xySev tiyija-T], tlui en
X^aXeTralvetf; ; fiexpi- S' av ravra $avfid^r}<;, aeavrw
13 'xaXeiraive fxaXkov rj eKeivoi^;. aKoirei ydp' 'i'^ei^i KaXd l/jLUTia, 6 yeiroiv aov ovk e')(eL' Ovpiha ex^i'i, 6€\et<i avrd yjrv^ai. ovk olSev eKelvo<{ ri to
ayadov ecTTi tov dvOpcoTrov, dWd <f)avTd^eTai oti
14 TO e^^etf KaXd ifidTta, tovto o Kal av ^avTa^rj.
CiTa firj eXdrj Kal dprj avTa ; dXXd av irXaKovvTa
heiKvvwv dv6pd)'7roi<; Xi')(yoi^ Kal fi6vo<i avTov
KaTaiTLvcov ov diX€i<; lua avTOV dprrdacoai; firj epeOi^e avTov<i, dvpiha fir) e^e, fir) ylrv)(^e aov Ta
IfiaTia.
15 K^dyo) Trpa)r]v aihr)povv Xv')(yov 6%&)r Trapd to4<> Oeol<; dKovaa<i -^o^ov t% Bvpiho^ KajeZpafiov.
evpov r)pTTaafikvov tov Xvyyov. e'neXoyiad)ir)v
OTi eiradkv tl o dpa<i ovk diriOavov. t'l ovv ; 16 avpiov, (f>^)fii, oaTpdKivov evprjaei<i. eKelva yap
diroXXvei, a e%et. " dircaXead fiov to ipaTtov.^'
ei^e? yap IfiaTiov. " dXyS) Tr)v Ke(f)aXjjv." fii) n KepaTa dXyei<; ; tL ovv dyavaKTei<i ; tovtwv
* 5<rT6 (Mowat) fioipots supplied by Capps for a lacuna of about eleven letters in S.
^ An illustration of the famous principle, nil admirari
(Horace, Epist. I. 6, 1). 124
BOOK I. XVIII. 11-16
angry at fools? VVhy, then, are we angry? Because
we admire the goods of which these men rob us. For, mark you, stop admiring^ your clothes, and you
are not angry at the man who steals them ; stop admiring
your wife's beauty, and you are not angry at her adulterer. Know that a thief or an adulterer
has no place among the things that are your own,
but only among the things that are another's and
that are not under your control. If you give these
things up and count them as nothing, at whom have
you still ground to feel angry ? But so long as you
admire these things, be angry at yourself and not at the men that I have just mentioned. For consider;
you have fine clothes and your neighbour does not
;
you have a window and wish to air them. He does not
know wherein the true good of man consists, but
fancies that it consists in having fine clothes, the very same fancy that you also entertain. Shall he not
come, then, and carry them off? Why, when you
show a cake to gluttonous men and then gulp it down all to yourself, are you not wanting them to snatch it ? Stop provoking them, stop having a window, stop airing your clothes.
Something similar happened to me also the other
day. I keep an iron lamp by the side of my household
gods, and, on hearing a noise at the window, I ran down. I found that the lamp had been stolen.
I reflected that the man who stole it was moved by
no unreasonable motive. What then ? To-morrow,
I say, you will find one of earthenware. Indeed, a man
loses only that which he already has. " I have lost my cloak." Yes, for you had a cloak. "I have a pain in my head." You don't have a pain in your
horns, do you ? Why, then, are you indignaiitti For
^^>:r<i?>
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
yap at aircoXeiai, tovtcov ol irovot, wv koI ai
Krr]crei<i. 17 " 'AW' o Tvpavvo<i Secret "—rt ; to aKeXof
" aXX a(f)€Xet '
—
ri ; tov rpd')(rfKov. rl ovv ov
hrjaeL ov8' a^eXet ; ttjv irpoaipecriv, 8ia tovto tt a/3- 18 ijyyeWov ol iraXaioX to Tvcodi aavTOV. tI ovv ; eSei VT) TOV? 6eov<; fieXeTav eVt tmv fiLKpwv koX
aiT iKeivcov ap^^opevov^ Bia/Saiveiv inl to, pel^o).
19 " K€(f)a\r)v aXycj." "oip,oc" p,T)X€ye. " wtLov aXySi"
" otfJLOi " /ij; Xeye. koL ov Xeyco oti ov SeSoTat (ttcvd^ai,
aXXa eacoOev p,i) cneid^r]'^. p,rj8^ av ^paSeax;
tov eTTi.Sea'fiov 6 7ral<i <jiipf), Kpavya^e koX a-irSi xal
Xiye " TrdvTe^ fie p,iaov(TCv." Tt<f yap p,rj pnarjcrr] 20 TOV TOLOVTOV / TOUTOt? TO XoiTTOV TTeTTOldcO'i Tol<i Soypaaiv opdo^ TrepiTraTec, eXevdepofi, ov')(l t&
p,eye9ei TreTroiOo)^ tov cr(opaT0<; coa-rrep d6Xr]T^^' ov yap ft)9 ovov di)TTr)Tov elvac Set. 21 Tt9 ovv 6 dr]TTrjT0<; ; ov ovk i^iaTrjaiv ovSev
T&v aTrpoaipeTcov. eiTa Xonrov eKaaTTjv twv
TTepiaTaaecov iirep^op-evo^ KaTup^avOdvco ew? ctti TOV dOXrjTov. " OUT09 e^ejBiaae tov irpcoTov KXrjpov.
22 T4 ovv TOV SevTcpov ; tC S' av Kavfia 17 ; tl 5' iv
^OXvfiTTia ; " Kal evravOa cocravTca. av dpyvpiSiov
7rpo^dXr)<i, KaTa(ppovr)aeL. tI ovv av Kopaai810V
; Tt ovv av iv aKoTw ; tl ovv av 8o^dpiov ;
^ That is, a man should prove himself invincible by reason and reflection, not by brute strength, or the sheer obstinacy
of passive resistance. 136
BOOK I. XVIII. 16-22
our losses and our pains have to do only with the
things which we possess. " But the tyrant will chain " What ? Your
leg. "But he will cut off " What? Your
neck. What, then, will he neither chain nor cut off? Your moral purpose. This is why the ancients gave
us the injunction, "Know thyself." What follows,
then .'' Wily, by the Gods, that one ought to practise
in small things, and beginning with them pass on to the greater. "I have a head-ache." Well, do not
say "Alas!" "I have an ear-ache." Do not say " Alas ! " And I am not saying that it is not permissible
to groan, only do not groan in the centre of your
being. And if your slave is slow in bringing your
bandage, do not cry out and make a wry face and
say, "Everybody hates me." Why, who would not
hate such a person ? For the future put your confidence
in these doctrines and walk about erect, free,
not putting your confidence in the size of your body,
like an athlete ; for you ought not to be invincible
in the way an ass is invincible.^
Who, then, is the invincible man ? He whom
nothing that is outside the sphere of his moral
purpose can dismay. I then proceed to consider the
circumstances one by one, as I would do in the case of the athlete. " This fellow has won the first round. What, then, will he do in the second .'' What if it be scorching hot ? And what will he do
at Olympia?" It is the same way with the case under consideration. If you put a bit of silver coin
in a man's way, he will despise it. Yes, but if you
put a bit of a wench in his way, what then ? Or if it be
in the dark, what then ? Or if you throw a bit of
reputation in his way, what then ? Or abuse, what
127
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Tt ovv av XoiSopiav ; tl ovv av eiraivov ; tl S' av
23 Oavarov ; BvvaTai ravra Trdvra viKrjcraL. n ovv av Kavfia ^, tovto iarr tl, av olvco/xevo^; ^ 'p ; rt av
fieXa^y^oXoyv ; ri ev vttvoi^ ; ovro'i /mol iariv o
dvLKrjTO'i dd\7]T7]<i.
id'. n&>? e%etz/ Bel 7r/)09 toi/? rvpdvvov^
;
1 "Oti dv TLVL irpocrf) ri irXeoveKrrjfia rj Bokt] ye
irpoaelvaL /j,r) irpoaov, rovrov irdcra dva^KT], eav
2 aTratSeuTO? 77, 7re(f>u(Tr)a6ac 8i avro. evduf o Tvpavvo<i Xeyei " iyco elfii 6 irdvroov /c/jarto-TO?."
Kal Tl p,oi Bvvaaai Trapaax^lv ; ope^iv fwi
hvvacraL Trepiiroiijcrai, ukcoXutov ; irodev croi ; av
yap e'^et? ; eKK\icnv uTrepnTTCOTOV ; crv yap
3 e%ef9 ; opfirjv dva/iidpTrjTOV ; Kal vov (TOi
fiereariv ; dye, ev vrjl Se cravrS) dappel<; r) rSt 4 elhoTL ; eirl S" dpfiaro<; tlvc r) rw elSoTi ; Tt S' iv Tat? dX\ai<; rex^at^ ; dxravTco^. Tt ovv
8vva<jai ; " 7rdvTe<{ jxe depaTrevovaiv." /cal yap
eyco TO TTivdKiov depaTTevu) KaX irXvvo) avro Kal
eKfidacTW Kal T'^? XrjKuOov evcKa irdaaaXov
^ Upton : oiiiixevos S.
^ Under all ordinary circumstances the man who is being
tested will resist the temptations of money, a maid, secrecy, reputation, and the like. But if, like the athlete, he be
tested under abnormal conditions, as when drunk, or mad, or
asleep, will he hold out against these temptations even then ? If he can, he is indeed invincible. 138
BOOK I. xviii. 2 2-xix, 4
then ? Or praise, what then ? Or death, what
then ? All these things he can overcome. What,
then, if it be scorching hot—that is, what if he be
drunk ? What if he be melancholy-mad ? ^ What
if asleep ? The man who passes all these tests is what I mean by the invincible athlete.
CHAPTER XIX
How ought we to bear ourselves toward tyrants ?
If a man possesses some superiority, or thinks at
least that he does, even though he does not, it is quite unavoidable that this man, if he is uneducated,
becomes puffed up on account of it. For example,
the tyrant exclaims, " I am the mightiest in the
world." Very well, what can you do for me ? Can
you secure for me desire that is free from any
hindrance? How can you? Do you have it yourself?
Can you secure for me aversion proof against
encountering what it would avoid ? Do you have it yourself? Or infallible choice? And where can you claim a share in that ? Come, when you are on
board ship, do you feel confidence in yourself, or in
the skilled navigator ? And when you are in a chariot,
in whom do you feel confidence other than the skilled
driver. And how is it in the other arts ? The same
way. What does your power amount to, then ? " All
men pay attention ^ to me." Yes, and I pay attention
to my little plate and wash it and wipe it out, and
for the sake of my oil-flask I drive a peg in the wall.
* The whole passage turns on the various meanings of
dtpairfvw, which include serve, attend to, give medical care to, pay attention to, pay court to, JlcUter, etc 129
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TT-^acro). Tt ovv ; ravra jjlov Kpetrrovd icniv ; ov' aXkd -x^peiav /jLOi Trape^^i rivd. TavTij^; ovv evexa 6e.pairevoa avrd. tl Be ; top ovov ov Oepa5
irevco ; ov vltttm avTOv tou? 7roSa<? ; ov TrepiKaOaipoa
; ovk olBaf on Tra? dvOptoiro^ eavrov
depairevei,, ae 8' ovtco^ o)? tov ovov ; iirel ti? ere 6 deparrevei, to? dvOpui-nov ; SeiKvve. Tt<? croi deXei
op.oio<; yeveadai, rt'? aov ^7/X&)t^9 yiverai &)9
Xo)KpdTov<i ; " dXXd Bvvafiai ere Tpa^rjXofcoirrjaai."
KaXa)<; \iyei<;. i^eXadofirji' oTt ae Bel depaireveiv
Koi o)? irvperov koI oi<i ')(^oXepav kuI ^oifiov
aTi'jaai, co? iv Poofxrj TlvpeTOV /3a)/i,o? icmv.
7 '\i OVV €<TTt, TO Topdaaov koX KaTaTrXrjrrov
Toi"? troXXov^ ; o Tvpavvo<; koX oi Bopv(f)6poi ; TTodev ; fXT] yevoiTO' ovk evBej^^erai to (f)va€i
eXevdepov vir dXXov Tiv6<! Tapa-)(6rivaL rj kwXv8
dP)vai ttXtjv v(f)^ eavTov. dXXd to. Boypiara avrov Tapdaaei. orav yap 6 Tvpavvo^ eiTrr] nvl
" B7](T0) crov TO aKeXo<;" 6 p,ev to aKeXo^ TeTifirj-
«ft)9 Xeyei " fU]' eXeijaov,'^ 6 Be Trjv irpoaipecnv
Ti]v eavTovXeyet " eX aoi XvaLreXearepov c^aiveTai,
Bi]aov." " ovKi7riaTpe<f)i} ; " " ovk iTri<rTpe<f>opat.^'
9 " eyd) (TOL Bei^o) on Kvpi6<i elfii." " noOev av ; €p,e 6 Zeu9 eXevdepov d^rjKev. rj BoKec^ on ep-eXXev rov iBiov vlov edv KaraBovXovcrdai ; tov veKpov
10 Be fiov Kvpio<i el, Xd0e avrov.^^ " waQ^ oTav p,oi
irpoair]^, €pL€ ov OepaTrevea ; " " oi/' dXX' ifiav130
BOOK I. XIX. 4-IO
What follows, then ? Are these things superior to me? No, but they render me some service, and
therefore I pay attention to them. Again, do I not
jiay attention to my donkey ? Do I not wash his feet? Do 1 not curry him? Do you not know that
every man pays attention to himself, and to you just
as he does to his donkey? For who pays attention
to you as to a man ? Point him out to me. Who
wishes to become like you ? Who becomes a zealous
follower of yours as naen did of Socrates? "But I can cut off your head." Well said I I had forgotten
that I ought to pay attention to you, as to fever or
cholera, and set up an altar to you, just as in Rome
there is an altar to the God Fever. What is it, then, that disturbs and bewilders the
multitude ? Is it the tyrant and his bodyguards ? How is that possible ? Nay, far from it ! It is not
|K)Ssible that that which is by nature free should be
disturbed or thwarted by anything but itself. But
it is a man's own judgements that disturb him. For
when the tyrant says to a man, " I will chain your
leg," the man who has set a high value on his leg
re|)lies, " Nay, have mercy upon me," while the man
who has set a high value on his moral purpose replies,
"If it seems more profitable to you to do so, chain
it." "Do you not care?" "No, I do not care."
"I will show you that I am master." "How can yon be my master ? Zeus has set me free. Or do
you really think tliat he was likely to let his own
son be made a slave ? You are, however, master of
my dead body, take it." " You mean, then, that
when you approach me you will not pay attention
to me?" "No, I pay attention only to myself.
But if you wish me to say that I pay attention to i3»
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Tov. el 8e ^eXet? /xe Xiyeiv on koI ae, Xeya ctol
11 ToOto ovk ecTTiv (^iXavTov yiyove yap oyTtu?
TO ^a)OV' avTov eve/ca iravra iroieZ. koI yap 6
rfKLO'i avTov evexa iravra Troiel fcac to Xoiirov
12 auT09 o Zeu?. dXX' orav OeXj] elvai 'Terto? kuI
^EiTTCKcipTrio^ Kal TraTTjp avhpwv re Oewv re, 6pa<i
on TovTcov ra>p epyojv kol tcov Trpoarjyoptcov ov SvvaTai Tvx^lv, av fxrj el<i rb kolvov u>(^eXLixo<i 17. 13 KuOoXov T€ T0iavTr]v rrjv ^ (f)vaiv rov XoyiKov
i^wov KarecKevacrev, "va ixrihevo<i rSiV IBiwv dya0(bv
8vv7]Tat Tvyxdv€ip, av^ /x-q n ei<i to kolvov
14 oii<peXi/j,ov irpocrcfiep'rjTai, ovrco^ ovKen aKOivcovr}-
16 rov yiverai ro iravra avrov evexa iroieiv- iirel ri iKhe)(r] ; 'iva n<; diroarfi avrov Kal rov Ihiov
o-v/jL(f>epovro^ ; Kal ttw? eVt p,La Kal rj aurrj dp^r)
irdaiv earai rj irpo<; aiird 0LKei(iicn<i
;
16 Tt ovv ; orav virfj Soyp-ara dXXoKora irepl
T(ov dirpoatperoov eb? ^ ovrcov dyadwv Kal KaKoJV,
17 irdcra dvayKij Oepaireveiv tou? rvpdvvovi. ux^eXjov
yap rov<; rvpdvvov; p,6vov, tou? Koircovlra^
8' ov. TTco? Se Kal (f)p6vcpx)(i yiverai i^aicfyvr]^
avdpwTTo<;, orav K.aiaap avrov iirl rov Xaadvov
iTOit']crrj. irS>^ evdu<i Xeyop>€V " (f)povLp^a)<i p,ot \eX,a18
XrjKev ^rfXiKicov. ' rjOeXov avrov d7rol3Xr)$rjvai
19 rov KOTTpoivo<i, 'iva irdXiv a(f>p(ov aoi SoKrj. el^^v
nva 'Rira(f)p68tro<; CKvrea, ov 8id ro p)(^or)<Trov
eivai iircoXrjaev. elra eKelvo<^ Kara nva 8aip,ova
^ Added by Koraes. * Added by Trincavelli.
» Wolf : wws S.
^ That is, the whole order of nature requires every living
thing to appropriate, or make its own, wliatever it needs in order to maintain life. 132
BOOK I. XIX. 10-19
you too, I tell you that I do so, but only as I pay
attention to my pot."
This is not mere self-love ; such is the nature of
the animal man ; everything that he does is for himself.
Why, even the sun does everything for its own sake, and, for that matter, so does Zeus himself.
But when Zeus wishes to be " Rain-bringer," and
"Fruit-giver," and "Father of men and of gods,"
you can see for yourself that he cannot achieve these
works, or win these appellations, unless he proves
himself useful to the common interest ; and in general
he has so constituted the nature of the rational
animal man, that he can attain nothing of his own
proper goods unless he contributes something to the
common interest. Hence it follows that it can no
longer be regarded as unsocial for a man to do everything
for his own sake. For what do you expect ? That a man should neglect himself and his own
interest? And in that case how can there be room
for one and the same principle of action for all,
namely, that of appropriation ^ to their own
needs ? What then ? When men entertain absurd opinions
about what lies outside the province of the moral
purpose, counting it good or bad, it is altogether
unavoidable for them to pay attention to the tyrant.
Aye, would that it were merely the tyrants and not
their chamberlains too I And yet how can the man
suddenly become wise when Caesar puts him in charge of his chamberpot? How can we forthwith
say " Felicio has spoken wisely to me " ? I would
that he were deposed from the superintendency of
the dunghill, that you may think him a fool again ! Epaphroditus owned a certain cobbler whom he sold
because he was useless ; then by some chance the
133
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
dyopaaOel^ viro tivo<; rwv K-aiaaptavcov rov
Katcra/909 (TKVTev^ ijeveTO. etSe? av 7r&)? avrbu
20 irifxa 6 ^E7ra(f>p68tTO<;' "to irpdcrcrei ^tjXiklcov 6
21 dyado<;, (f>iKa) ae ; " eira et Tt? rifimv eTrvOero " tl
TTOcei avTo^ ; " eXeyeTO otc " fierd ^i]\iklcovo<;
22 ^ovXeveTai irepi Ttvo?." ovyl yap TrerrpaKei
23 avrov cb? d')(^pT}(TTOV ; Tt? ovv avrov d^vco <pp6-
vifiov eTroli](T€v ; tout ecrrt ro ti/jluv dXXo rt
7} rd TrpoatpeTLKa.
24 "^H^icoTuc 8r]/jLap)^La^." 7rdi>re<; ol d7ravT(JovT€<i
avvrjSovrat' dXXo^ TOv<i 6(f)daXjjLob<; KuracpiXet,
dXXo^ rov Tpd)^T]Xov, ol hovXoi ra<i ')(etpa<i,
ep')(eTat el<i oIkov, euploKei Xv)(^vov^ aTrrofievov^.
25 dva^aivei el<i to K.airLTciiXLov, ifridvei. ti? ovv
irdoTTore vnep rov 6pe')(6rivai KaXSi<i edvcrev ; virep rov op/mrjcrai Kara ^vcrtv ; eKel yap kuc
d€ol<i ev^apccrrovfiev, ottov ro ^ dyadov riOefieda.
26 1,7}/j.ep6v Tt9 u-rrep iep(i)crvvr]<; iXdXei fioi rov Avyovarov. Xeyco avro) " dvOpwTre, d(f)e^ ro
27 Trpdyfiw hairavrjcr ei<i iroXXd el<i ov8ev."—" 'AXX,
ol rd<i oovd'i"^ (f)7](7i, " ypd(f>ovr€^ ypd\Jrovai ro
e/uLov ovopa^—" M?; rt ovi' av rot? dvaytyvM28
(jKovGL Xkyei^ irapcav e'/xe yeypd^acriv ; el 8e Kal
vvv hvvacrac irapelvat jracriv, edv dirodavr)';, rt
TToirjcrei^ ; "—" Mevet /xov ro ovop,a.^ —" rpd-yjrov avro el<i XiOov Kal fievel. dye e^co Se Niko-
^ OTTOV Th Shaftesbury : oT tovto S.
* 0. Hirschfeld (7' uivds Diels) : <ptiivas S. 134
BOOK I. XIX. 19-28
fellow was bought by a member of Caesar's household
and became cobbler to Caesar. You should have
seen how Epaphroditus honoured him ! " How is my good Felicio, I pray you?" he used to say. And
then if someone asked us, " What is your master ^ doing ? " he was told, " He is consulting Felicio about
something or other." Why, had he not sold him as being useless } Who, then, had suddenly made a
wise man out of him .' This is what it means to
honour something else than what lies within the
province of the moral purpose. " He has been honoured with a tribuneship," someone says. All who meet him offer their congratulations
; one man kisses him on the eyes, another on the neck, his slaves kiss his hands. He goes
home ; he finds lamps being lighted. He climbs up
the Capitol and offers sacrifice. Now who ever sacri- ficed as a thank-offering for having had right desire, or for having exercised choice in accordance with
nature ? For we give thanks to the gods for that
wherein we set the good.
To-day a man was talking to me about a priesthood
of Augustus. I say to him, " Man, drop the
matter ; you will be spending a great deal to no
purpose." "But," says he, "those who draw up
deeds of sale will inscribe my name." " Do you
really expect, then, to be present when the deeds
are read and say, ' That is my name they have
written ' ? And even supposing you are now able
to be present whenever anyone reads them, what
will you do if you die ? " " My name will remain
after me." " Inscribe it on a stone and it will remain
after you. Come now, who will remember you outside
^ Epaphroditus once owned Epictetus.
135
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
29 TToXecoi; ti? aov fiveia ; "—"
' AXXa xp^'^ovv cne- (pavov (popijaco.^ —" Et aira^ €7ridvfi€t<i crrecfidvov,
poSivov Xa^cov irepiOov oyfret yap KOfiyfroTepov."
K . Tlepi Tov Xoyov TT&i? auTov dewpTjTtKOf;
iariv.
1 Udaa Te')(y'r) kol Svvap,i^ 7rporjyovfj,€VQ)v rivSiV
2 etTTt OeooprjTiKTj. orav pev ovv 6po€i87]<; rot? Sewpovpevoif Koi avrt), avayKalwi /cal auTr]<i
ylverai decoprjTiKi]' orav B' avop,oj€Vi]<i,^ ov Svva3
rai dewpelv eavTi'jv. olov cTKvriKr) irepl heppara
dvaaTp€(f)€Tat, avrrj 8e TravreXw? aTrtjWaKTai,
tt}? v\r)(; rS)v SeppaTcov 8id rovro ovk eariv
4 avrrj<i OecoprjTCKi]. ypapparixTj TrdXcv Trepl ttjv
iyypdp.parov (pwvtjv. prj ti ovv eVrt Kal avrrj
€yypdppaTo<; (fxov^ ; ovSapco'i. 8id tovto ov
6 hvvaraL OecopeZv eavTyv. 6 ovv X0709 7rp6<i rt TTore VTTO T//9 (f>vcr€Q)^ TrapelXrjTTTai ; tt/jo? 'X^prjcriv (pavraaioyv oiav Set- a^To? ovv Tt i(niv ; avaTYjpa €k iroiwv (ftavraaicbv' oi/tg)? yCverai
6 0ucr64 Kal aurov decopijriKo^i. irdXiv f] (fypovrjatf
TLva Oewpyjcrovaa irapeXrfXvdev ; dyadd Kal KaKa
Kal ovherepa. avTrj ^ ovv ri iariv ; dyaOov.
rj 5' dcf)po(TVVT] ri eariv ; KaKov. 6pa<; ovv on
»
' Meibom : h.v ouoyevrjs S.
* Scliegk : oStjj aS'.
^ The city in which Epictetus taught during the latter part of his life, and where the present conversation is clearly
thought of as taking place. Greek and Roman documents,
instead of being attested, as most commonly among us, by a 136
BOOK I. XIX. 28-xx. 6
of Nicopolis ? " ^ " But I shall wear a crown of gold." " If you desire a crown at all, take a crown of roses and put it on ; you will look much more elegant in
that"
CHAPTER XX
Horn the reasoning faculty contemplates itself Every art and faculty makes certain things the
special object of its contemplation. N^ow when the
art or faculty itself is of like kind with what it contemplates, it becomes inevitably self-contemplative
; but when it is of unlike kind, it cannot
contemplate itself. For example, the art of leatherworking
has to do with hides, but the art itself is altogether different from the material of hides, wherefore
it is not self-contemplative. Again, the art of
grammar has to do with written speech ; it is not,
therefore, also itself written speech, is it ? Not at
all. For this reason it cannot contemplate itself. Well then, for what purpose have we received reason from nature .' For the proper use of external impressions.
What, then, is reason itself? Something
composed out of a certain kind of external impressions.
Thus it comes naturally to be also self- contemplative. Once more, what are the things that
wisdom has been given us to contemplate } Things
good, bad, and neither good nor bad. What, then,
is wisdom itself.^ A good. And what is follv ? An
evil. Do you see, then, that wisdom inevitably comes
single notary, contained many names of witnesses, eponymous
magistrates, supervising officials, and the like. A priest of Augustus would naturally be called in often to sign formal
documents in one capacity or another.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
dvajKaio)'; koI avrri<; yiverai koI t^9 evavria^
7 dewpjjTLKi) ; Sea tovto epjov rov (fiiXoaocpov to
IxeyKTTov Kai irpcorov 8oKi/j.dl^€Lv to,^ (f}avTacrLa<;
Kal BiUKpLveiv Kal /jLrjSefilav dSoKi/xaaTOv 7rpocT(f)e- 8 peaOai. opdre eirl rov vo/jLLa/u,aTO<;, ottou 8ok€i
Tt eivai Trpof r)/jLd<;, ttco? Kal rexvrjv e^evprfKajxev
KUi 0(XOt,<i dpyvpoyvcofxcov 7rpoa')(^prjTai tt/jo?
SoKifiaatav rov vo/u,i(TfxaTo^, ttj o^jrei, rfj d(f>fj, 9 TTJ oacppaala, rd reXevrala ttj dKofj- p[yfra<i ^ to
Srjvdpiov tG) \lr6<pq) Trpoaexei Kal ou;^a7ra^ dpKelrai
yfrocfujaavTa, aX,V vtto t?}? ttoXX?)? 7rpo(TO)^7j<; 10 fiovaiKOf yiverai. ovT(i)<i ottov Biacpepeiv olofxeOa
TO ifkavdaOaL rov p,rj TrXavdaOai, ivravOa ttoX-
\i]v irpocToxv^ €la(f)€po/jL€v et? hiuKpicnv rcov Stall
frXavdv hwafievaiv, i-rrl Se raXaciraipov fjyefiovLKov
')(^daKovre<i Kai Kadev8ouT€<i, irdaav (fyavraaiav
Trapa7rpo(rSe)(^6liie0a' ?; yap ^r]/j,ta ov TrpoairiiTTei.
12 "Oral' ovv OeXrjq yvwvai, ttw? e^j^ei? rrepl p-ev rdyaOd Kal KaKa dveip-evco^, irepl rdStdcpopa S' ecnrevap-evoy^, eTrlcrry^aov ttw? ^';^f'? Trpo? to
€/crv(f)Xa)dr]vai Kal ttco? Trpo? to e^aTrarrjOPjvai
Kal yvcoar] on p.aKpdv el rov a)? Set TreTrovdevat
13 irepl dyaOoiv Kal KaKWV. " dXXd ttoWt}? ^X^'
')(^p€iav 7rapacrK€urj<i Kal irovov ttoXXov Kal /xadrjfidrcov."
Tt ovv ; eA.7ri^6t9 OTt rr]v p,eyLarr]v
14 Te)^v)]v dirb oXiycoi^ ecrriv dvaXa^elv ; Kairoi
avro<i fiev 6 7rpor]yovp,evo<i X0709 rwv (piXoa6(f)cov
Xiav earlv oXiyo^i. el deXei<; yvwvciL, dvdyvcoOi
15 rd Z/]VCi)V0'i Kal oyfrei. ri yap e'Xj^i' p-aKpov
^ Schegk : l>ri^as S.
^ i.e., in the sense of basing action upon only such impressions
as have been tested and found to be trustworthy.
138
BOOK I. XX. 6-15
to contemplate both itself and its opposite ? Therefore,
the first and greatest task of the philosopher is to test the impressions and discriminate between
them, and to apply ^ none that has not been tested.
You all see in the matter of coinage, in which it is felt that we have some interest, how we have even in- vented an art, and how many means the tester employs
to test the coinage—sight, touch, smell, finally hearing;
he throws the denarius down and then listens to the sound, and is not satisfied with the sound it makes on a single test, but, as a result of his constant
attention to the matter, he catches the tune, like a musician. Thus^ where we feel that it makes a good
deal of difference to us whether we go wrong or do
not go wrong, there we apply any amount of attention
to discriminating between things that are capable of
making us go wrong, but in the case of our governing
principle, poor thing, we yawn and sleep and erroneously
accept any and every external impression ; for here the loss that we suffer does not attract our
attention.
When, therefore, you wish to realize how careless
you are about the good and the evil, and how zealous
you are about that which is indifferent, observe how
you feel about pliysical blindness on the one hand,
and mental delusion on the other, and you will find out that you are far from feeling as you ought
about things good and things evil. "Yes, but this requires much preparation, and much hard work, and
learning many things." Well, what then ? Do you
expect it to be possible to acquire the greatest art with a slight effort ? And yet the chief doctrine of
the philosophers is extremely brief. If you would
know, read what Zeno has to say and you will see.
139
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
enreiv oti " Te\o<; icrrl to ^Trecrdai deoi<i, ovtrla
16 8 ayadov 'X^prjcri'i o'ia Set (f)avTacn(Ov " ; Xeye " ri ovv i(ni deo<i koX ri (jtavraaia ; kol ri ecrc
(f>v(Ti^ 7] €7rl fiepov^ Koi ri iari (f)vcn<; r/ rSiv
17 okayv ; " rjhri fxaKpov. av ovv eXdcov 'R7rifCovpo<;
etirrj, on iv aapKi Sec elvai to dyaOov, iraXiv
fxuKpov yiverai koI dvdyKT) aKOvcrai ri ro irpor}-
yovfievov iariv icpi' rjfxoiv, tl to vTroarariKov xal
ov(ria)8e<;. on ro Kox^iov dyaOov ovk elK0<i elvai iv rSt KeXix^ei, to ovv tov dvOpcoirov elKO^; ; 18 (TV S' avTo<i ri Kvpccorepov e')(€.i'i, ^^iiriKovpe ; ri
ianv iv ao\ ro ^ovXevofxevov, ro iiriaKeinofxevov
eKacrra, rb irepX rij^; <TapKO<i avrrji; on
19 TO irpOTjyov/xevov ianv ^ irriKpivov ; ri Se Kal
Xv^vov aTTTet? koI irovel<; virep -^ficov Kal rrjXiKavra
^t^Xia ypdcpeK ; Iva firj dyvoijaco/iev
^fiei<; TT)v dXrjOeiav ; rive^ r)/iiei<i ; ri TTpo^ ere ovret ; ovroo jxaKpo^ o Xoyo<; yiverai.
Ka , IT/909 T0U9 Oavfid^eaOac deXovra<i.
1 "Orav TL<i rjv hel <rrdaiv e')(r) iv T(p ^iw, e^oi
2 ov Kex^wev. dvdpcoire, ri OeXefi croi yeveaOat ; iyo) /,i€v dpKovfxaL, dv opeywfiat kuI eKKXivw
Kara (f)vatv, av opfifj Kal dcpopfif] "x^pwfiai, (w?
'jT€(f)VKa, av Trpodecrei,^ dv iin^oXy, dv avy-
^ rh after iaTiv deleted by Usener.
* Meibom (Wolf) : irpocrOfffn S. 140
BOOK I. XX. 15-XX1. 2 For what is there lengthy in his statement : " To
follow the gods is man's end, and the essence of
good is the proper use of external impressions " ? Ask, " What, then, is God, and what is an external
impression ? And what is nature in the individual
and nature in the universe ? " You already have
a lengthy statement. If Epicurus should come and
say that the good ought to be in the flesh, again the
explanation becomes lengthy, and you must be told
what is the principal faculty within us, and what our
substantial, and what our essential, nature is. Since
it is not probable that the good of a snail lies in its shell, is it, then, probable that the good of man lies in his flesh ? But take your own case, Epicurus
;
what more masterful faculty do you yourself possess ? What is that thing within you which takes counsel,
which examines into all things severally, which, after
examining the flesh itself, decides that it is the
principal matter f And why do you light a lamp
and toil in our behalf, and write such quantities
of books ? Is it that we may not fail to know the
truth ? Who are we ? And what are we to you ? And so the argument becomes lengthy.
CHAPTER XXI
To those who would be admired
When a man has his proper station in life, he is not
all agape for things beyond it. Man, what is it you
want to have happen to you ? As for myself, I am
content if I exercise desire and aversion in accord- ance with nature, if I employ choice and refusal as my
nature is, and similarly employ purpose and design
141
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
KaTadeaei. ri ovv 't)fuv o/SeXiaKov KaraTTicov
3 TrepiTTarel'i ; " yOeXov, 'iva fie koI ol airavTwvre';
daufid^waiv koX eiraKoXovOovvre'^ iinKpav4
lyd^oyaiv (o fMeydXov (f)i\oa6(pov." rtVe? elcxlv ovToi, vcfi^ wv dau/bid^eaf^ai 6eX€i<i ; ov^ ovroi
elai, irepi o)v etcodwi Xiyeiv on fialvovrai ; ri ovv ; VTTO T(Ji)v fiaivofievbiv Oaup.d^eadai 8eXei<i ;
K^'. Uepl Toyv TrpoXrjy^eaiv.
1 YlpoXr)-\^€i<i KOLval Traaiv dvdpco7roc<i elaiv Kol
7rp6Xrj-\ln<; irpoXi'iy^et ov p^dx^Tai. rt? yap rjfiMU ov Tidrjcriv, on to dyadov (Tvp,(f)epov icrn /cal aipeTov Kal ck irdarjf; avro 7repcaTda6(o<} Set jjLenevai KaX Skokciv ; tl^; 5' i^ficou ov Tidrjcnv,
on to hiKaiov /caXov iaTC Kal irpeirov ; ttot
2 ovv T] pdxv yiveTat ; irepl ttjv i^apfxoyrjv tcov
3 TTpoXrj-^ewv Tal<i irrl p,epov<i ovaiai^;, otuv 6 fiev
etirr) " kuXm^ iiroi-qcrev, dvSpeio^ ecrrtv^' " ov, dXX aTTOvevoTjpevo'i. evdev rj fid^^rj yiveTai
4 T0t9 dvOpcoTToif irpof dXX7]Xov<;. avTi] ea-Ttv rj 'lovSalcov Kal Xvpwv Kal AiyvnTLOiv Kal 'Pcopaiwv
pd-)(rj, ov irepl tov oti to oaiov TrdvTcov irpoTip,r}T€ov
Kal iu iravTi fieTaSioyKTeov, dXXd iroTepov
iaTtv oaiov touto to '^oipeiov (payelv rj dvoaiov.
5 TavTTjV TTjv pd^ijv €vp/]a6T€ Kal Ayap€jjLvovo<;
Kal W.^iXXeo)';. KaXei yap avTOv<i el<i to /xeaov.
Ti Xey€i<i (TV, 0) ^Aydpepvov ; ov Set yeveaOai
^ Of one with a stiff and self-important bearing. Our
equivalent phrase is " to swallow a ramrod."
142
BOOK I. XXI. 2-xxii. 5 and assent. VVhy, then, do you walk around in our
presence as though you had swallowed a spit ?
^ "It
has always been my wish that those who meet me
should admire me and as they follow me should
exclaim, ' O the great philosopher ! ' " Who are those people by whom you wish to be admired ? Are they not these about whom you are in the habit
of saying that they are mad ? What then ? Do you
wish to be admired by the mad ?
CHAPTER XXII
Of our preconceptions
Preconceptions are common to all men, and one
preconception does not contradict another. For who
among us does not assume that the good is profitable
and something to be chosen, and that in every
circumstance we ought to seek and pursue it ? And
who among us does not assume that righteousness is beautiful and becoming ? When, then, does contradiction
arise ? It arises in the application of our preconceptions to the particular cases, when one
person says, " He did nobly, he is brave "
; another,
"No, but he is out of his mind." Thence arises the
conflict of men with one another. This is the conflict betweenJews and Syrians and Egyptians and Romans,
not over the question whether holiness should be put
before everything else and should be pursued in all circumstances, but whether the particular act of
eating swine's flesh is holy or unholy. This, you
will find, was also the cause of conflict between
Agamemnon and Achilles. Come, summon them
before us. What do you say, Agamemnon ? Ought
143
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ra Seovra koI to, Ka\(o<; e')(^ovTa ; " hel /xev ovv."
6 (Tif Se Tt \ey€i.<;, co 'A^j^tXXeO ; ovk apecrKei croi yLveadat to, /caXco? e)(^ovTa ; " ifiol /xev ovv
TravToav fxaXKna dpecKei. i(f>apfi6aaTe ovv
7 Ta<i TrpoXTj-yjrei^. ivrevdev rj ap')(r) p,d')(r]<^. o
fiev Xeyei " ov ')(^pr) airoScSopai fie rrjp X.pv(7r]i,Ba
TO) irarpi, o he Xeyei " Sel fxev ovv^^ 7rdvTto<i €Tepo<; avrSyv kukco^ e<f)apfi6^€t ttjv TrpoXrj-yjriv 8 Tov 8eovTO<i. irdXiv 6 fiev Xeyei " ovkovv, et fie Set diroSovvai rrfv ^pvarjiBa, 8ei fie Xa/Selv vfiSiv
rivo<i TO yepa<;," 6 6e " rr^v ifirjv ovv Xd^r)<i
epcofievrjv ; " " rrjv arjv " ^rjcxLV. " iyo) ovv
fi6vo<;—;" "a\V ey<o fiovo^ fir) e^tu ;" ovtco^ P'd^r)
yiverat.
9 Tt ovv e<TTi TO TraiSeveadat ; fiavOdveiv ra<i
(f>vaiKa<i ITpoXr)-\^ei<; i(f)apfi6^eiv ral<; eVi fiepov<i
oval,ai<i KaraXXrjXw'i rfj (pv<jei Koi Xoiirov hteXelv,
10 OTt T«ov ovTcov TO, fiiv icrriv e^' '^ficv, rd 8e ovk
€<f> 7)fiLV' e(f> r]fuv fiev 7rpoaLp€ai<; koi irdvra ra rrrpoaiperiKa ep^a, ovk ecf)^ rjfilv 8e to atafia,
rd fiepr] tov acapaTO^, KTija€i<;, yovel<i, dSeXcpoL,
11 TCKva, 7raTpc<i, dirXcoi; ol KoiviavoL ttov ovv
Owfiev TO dyaOov ; iroia ovaia avTO e(f>apfi6- 12 aofiev ; Trj e'^' r^plv
;
—EtTa ovk ecniv dyadov
vyleia koX dpTioTi}^ Koi ^corj, aXX' oiiSe tckvu
144
BOOK I. XXII. 5-12
not that to be done which is proper, and that which
is noble? "Indeed it ought." And what do you
say, Achilles ? Do you not agree that what is noble
ought to be done .'' " As for me, I agree most
emphatically with that principle." Very well, then,
apply your preconceptions to the particular cases.
It is just there the conflict starts. The one says, " I ought not to be compelled to give back Chryseis to her father," while the other says, " Indeed you
ought." Most certainly one of the two is making a bad application of the preconception " what one ought
to do." Again, the one of them says, " V^ery well,
if I ought to give back Chryseis, then I ought to take
from some one of you the prize he has won," and the
other replies, " VV'ould you, then, take the woman I love?" "Yes, the woman you love," the first answers. " Shall I, then, be the only one— ?
"
" But shall I be the only one to have nothing ? " So a conflict arises. What, then, does it mean to be getting an educa
tion.'' It means to be learning how to apply the
natural preconceptions to particular cases, each to the other in conformity with nature, and, further, to make the distinction, that some things are under our
control while others are not under our control.
Under our control are moral purp>ose and all the
acts of moral purpose ; but not under our control are the body, the parts of the body, possessions, parents,
brothers, children, country—in a word, all that with
which we associate. Where, then, shall we place " the good " .'' To what class of things are we going
to apply it ? To the class of things that are under
our control ? —What, is not health, then, a good thing,
and a sound body, and life ? Nay, and not even
>45
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovoe yov€t<; ovBe irarpL'i ; —Kat Tt? crov avi^erai ; 13 fieTaOwfiev ovv avro ttoXiv ivBdhe. eV^e^^erat ovv ^XuTTTOfiepov Kal aTTOTvy^dvovra tcov dyaOwv
evSaifiovelv ; —Ovk ivBi-^eTai. —Kal Tijpeiv^ rr]v
7rp6<i Toi)? KOLvcovov<; o'lav hei avacnpo^rjv ; Kal
Treo? eVSe^^erat ; iyou yap irecfiVKa tt/jo? to ifiov
14 avp,<))epov. €1 av/x(f)€p€i /xoi dypov e-)(eLv, (rvfi(f)€p€i
/jLOi Kal d<^e\.ecy6ai avjov tov TrXycriov el avfi-
(f>epei, fioi l/udriov e-)(€iv, (TV/j,(f)ep€i p,ot Kal KXeyjrai
avTo eK ^aXaveiov. evOev TToXep^oi, (rrdaeis,
15 Tvpavvihe<i, i7n/3ov\ai. ttoi? S' ert Svvijaofiai
aTToBiBovai "^ TO tt/oo? tov Aia Ka6f)K0v ; el yap
^XdirTOfjLaL Kal utv^m, ovk eTrtaTpecfieTal fiov. Kal " Tt fioi Kal avTw, el ov SvvaTai /j,oi /Sot;-
drjcrai ;* Kal irdXiv " Tt fioi Kal avrw, el OeXei
fi ii> tolovtok; elvac ev ol? el^it ;
' ap^o/J-ao Xonrov
16 fiiaelv avTov. tl ovv vaov<; 7roiovp,ev, Tt ovu dydXfiaTa, o)? KaKOt^ Bai/j,oaiv, &><? TTvperw tw
Ad ; Kal TTw? en "ZcoTJjp Kal ttw? 'Terto? Kal
TTci)? 'ETrt/capTTto? ; Kal fiijv, av evravdd nrov
dcofiev rrjv ovcriav tov dyaOov, rrdvTa Taina
e^aKoXovdeZ.
17 Tt ovv Troirjacoixev ; —Ai/tt; ecrri ^TjTrjaif tov
(f)tXo(TO(f)OvvTOS Tu> ovTi Kal q)Blvovto<;' vvv eyoo
18 ov')(^ opoi Tt eaTi to dyaOov Kal to KaKov ov
ixaivopai ; vai' d'XX' av ^ evTavdd irov 6o) to
dyaOov, ev Tol<i irpoaipeTiKol^, irdvTC^ fiov KaTayeXdaovTai.
rj^ei Ti<i yepcov iroXio^; ')(^pvaov<i
' Added by Kroneiiberg. * Suggested by Schenkl.
' Added by Schenkl.
1 Of. I. 19, 6, an altar of Fever in Rome.
146
BOOK I. XXII. 1 2-18
children, or parents, or country ?—And who will tolerate you if you deny that? Therefore, let us
transfer the designation " good " to these things.
But is it possible, then, for a man to be happy if he
sustains injury and fails to get that which is good ?—It
is not possible.—And to maintain the proper relations
with his associates ? And how can it be possible ? For it is my nature to look out for my own interest. If it is my interest to have a farm, it is my interest
to take it away from my neighbour ; if it is my
interest to have a cloak, it is my interest also to steal
it from a bath. Tiiis is the source of wars, seditions,
tyrannies, plots. And again, how shall I any longer
be able to perform my duty towards Zeus.^ For if I sustain injury and am unfortunate, he pays no heed
to me. And then we hear men saying, " What have
I to do with him, if he is unable to help us ? " And
again, " What have I to do with him, if he wills that
I be in such a state as I am now ? " The ne.xt step
is that I begin to hate him. Why, then, do we
build temples to the gods, and make statues of them,
as for evil spirits —for Zeus as for a god of Fever ?
* And how can he any longer be " Saviour," and
" Rain-bringer," and " Fruit-giver } " And, in truth,
if we set the nature of the good somewhere in this sphere, all these things follow. What, then, shall we do ?—This is a subject of
enquiry for the man who truly philosophizes and is in travail of thought. Says such a man to himself, " I do not now see what is the good and what is the
evil ; am I not mad ? " Yes, but suppose I set the
good somewhere here, among the things that the will controls, all men will laugh at me. Some whitehaired
old man with many a gold ring on his fingers
147
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
oaKTvXLOvi e')(<iiv ttoWou?, elra e7ri<TeLaa<i ttjv
K€(f>aXr)v epeZ " d/covaov fMov, TeKvov hel fiev Kal
(j)i\oao<pelv, Set Se Kal €yK6(f>dXov e-)(^eiv raina
19 ficopd eariv. av irapa twv (f>i\oa6(f>ci)v fiavddvei<}
crvXXoyia/jiov, rl he aoi Troirjreov iariv, ait 20 KoXXiov oi8a<; 7) 01 (f>i,\6ao(f)oi.^^ avOpcoire, ti ovv fioi iTTtrifia^, el olSa ; rovrw Ta> dvhpaTr6ha>
21 Tt eiTTft) ; av aioiirSi, pijyvvTat, eKeivo^. o)? Set Xeyeip on " avyyvcodl ^01 d)<; rot? ipcocnv' ovk
eifil ifiavTov, fiaivofiai.""
Ky . IIpo? ^FiirlKovpov.
1 'ETTivoe? Kal ^EiTTLKOvpo^ OTi (f)vaei eafiev kolvcoviKOi,
aW' aira^ ev tw KeXv(f)ei Oel<i ro dyaOov
2 fjfxSiv ovKeTi Svvarai dXXo ouSep elirelv. ttvlXiv yap eKeivov Xiav Kparel, on ov Sel d7r€<nracr/jbevov
ovBev Trjf Tov dyadov ovaia<i ovre Oav/xd^eiv
ovT d'iTohe-)(^ecydat' Kal KaXa)<i avTov Kparel.
3 TTW? ovp en kocvwvikol ^ eafiev, 0?? fxr) (fivcriKT)
can irpo'i rk eyyova ^iXoaropyia ; Sia ri diro-
(TVfi^ovXevei<i rca cro^S) TeKvoTpo(f)€iv ; rl (fyo^fj 4 fir) 8ia ravra eh Xinra<i efiirear) ; Bid yap tov
y[vv ^ TOV ecrco Tpe<^6fievov efjiir'nnei ; tI ovv
avTcp fieXei, av ^IvlSiov fxiKpov ecroi KaraKXait]
5 avTov ; dXlC olhev, on, av dira^ yevr^Tai iracSlov,
* Wolf : ViroVOTfTlKol S.
* Bentley : fivv S and the editions.
^ The reference here is clearly to Mys ("Mouse"), a
favourite slave of Epicurus, who was brought up in his house, and took an active part in his philosophical studies,
148
BOOK I. XXII. 18-XX111. 5
will come along, and then he will shake his head and
say, " Listen to me, my son ; one ought of course to philosophize, but one ought also to keep one's head ; this is all nonsense. You learn a syllogism from the
philosophers, but you know better than the
philosophers what you ought to do." Man, why,
then, do you censure me, if 1 know ? What shall
I say to this slave ? If I hold my peace, the fellow
bursts with indignation. So I must say, " Forgive
me as you would lovers ; I am not my own master
;
I am mad."
CHAPTER XXIII
In answer to Epicurus
Even Epicurus understands that we are by nature
social beings, but having once set our good in the
husk which we wear, he cannot go on and say anything
inconsistent with this. For, he next insists emphatically upon the principle that we ought
neither to admire nor to accept anything that is detached from the nature of the good ; and he is right in so doing. But how, then, can we still be
social beings, if affection for our own children is not
a natural sentiment.* Why do you dissuade the
wise man from bringing up children.'' W'hy are you
afraid that sorrow will come to him on their account ? What, does sorrow come to him on account of his house-slave Mouse ? ^ Well, what does it matter
to him if his little Mouse in his home begins to
cry.? Nay he knows, that if once a child is bom,
as Bentley saw (cf. Trans. Amer. Philol. Assoc., LII., 451).
There is no evidence to support the common explanation
that Epicurus had compared children to mice. 149
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
0UK6TI e(fi rj/jLtv iaTi ixrj (TTepyeiv /x^/Se (f^povri^eiv
6 eV avTM. Bia rouro (^yjalv ovSe iroXnevcrecrdaL ^ TOP vovv e^ovTw olSev yap riva Bel irotelv tov
TToXnevofxevov iTreiroi el d)<; ev fiviai<; /xeXXet?
7 avaarpe^eadai, tl KcoXvei ; aXX 6p.u)<i ^ eihu><i ravTU roXficl Xeyeiv ort " fJirj avatpoip^da reKva.''
aWa Trpo^arov fxev ovk aTroXelirei ro aurov
eyyovov ovSe XvKo<i, avdpwno'^ 3' airoXei-rrei ; rl
8 OeXei^ ; p,(opov^ rjpd<: elvai o)? tcl 7rp6/3ara ; ouS'
CKelva cnroXeiTreL. drjpKoSei^ co? tou? Xvkov<; ; 9 ovS* e/cetvoi aTroXeLTTOucriv. aye, rl^ he aoi irei- derat ISoov Traihiov avTOv KXalov errl ttjv yrjv
10 TreTTTty/fo*? ; €70) p,€v olpai on el koI ipavTevaaro
rj p,'^T7]p (TOV Ka\ iraTTjpy on p.eXXet<i ravra
Xeyeiv, ovk dv ae eppiyfrav.
kB'. n&J9 77/009 Ta9 7repi<rTd(Tei<; dymviareov ;
1 At 7repiaTda€i<i elalv at tov<; dvBpa<i SeiKvvovaat.
XoiTTOv orav ip,7re<Tri TTepicnaai'i, p,ep.vr](To
on 6 deo^ ae ft)9 uXei'TrrTj'i Tpaj(el veavLcrKO) a-vp,/3€- 2 ^XrjKev.^ —"Iva rl ; (f>T}aiv.—'Iva 'OXvpTrioviKi]^
yevY]- Bi')(^a S' IhpMTo^ ov ytyverai. epol /xev ovSel^ BoKcl fcpelaaova iar'^riKevai ireplaraaiv J79 crv
€(T-)(r}Ka<;, av deXrj<i (W9 ddXrjrrjf; veavlaKw -^prjaOai.
^ Upton (after Schegk) : -KoMrivrraa-dai. S.
2 Kronenberg : i (xt) S. * Wolf: ^i^KriKtv S.
'^ Since flies have no social organization or relationships,
and there is nothing to compel one to live like a man, and
not like an unsocial animal, except one's own sense of fitness of things.
BOOK I. XXIII. 5-XXIV. 2
it is no longer in our power not to love it or to care for it. For the same reason Epicurus says that a man of sense does not engage in politics either;
for he knows what the man who engages in politics
has to do—since, of course, if you are going to live among men as though you were a fly among flies,^ what is to hinder you ? Yet, despite the fact that
he knows this, he still has the audacity to say, " Let us not bring up children." But a sheep does
not abandon its own offspring, nor a wolf; and yet
does a man abandon his ? Wliat do you wish us to do ? Would you have us be foolish as sheep ? But
even they do not desert their offspring. Would you
have us be fierce as wolves ? But even they do not
desert their offspring. Come now, who follows your
advice when he sees his child fallen on the ground
and crying? Why, in my opinion, your mother and
your father, even if they had divined that you were
going to say such things, would not have exposed
you!
CHAPTER XXIV
How should we struggle against difficulties ? It is difficulties that show what men are. Consequently,
when a difficulty befalls, remember that
God, like a physical trainer, has matched you with
a rugged young man. What for ? some one says.
So that you may become an Olympic victor ; but
that cannot be done without sweat. To mv wav of
thinking no one has got a finer difficulty than the one which you have got, if only you are willing to
make use of it as an athlete makes use of a young
'51
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
3 Kal vvv Tjfiei^ ye et? ttjv 'Pco/mtjv KardcrKOTrov
Tre/MTTOfiei'. ov8€l<; 8e SetXbv Kardcr/coTrov irifiTTei, IV , av fiovov cLKOvar) -y^ot^ov koX (TKidv irodev tSrj, T/)e%&)i/ eXOrj rerapa'yfxevo'i Koi Xeywv rjhrj irapelvaL
4 Tou? TToXe/jLiovi. ovToo^ VVV Kal (TV av eXOatv rjfilv €477779 "(fio^epa TO, iv 'Vdafirj irpdyfiara, Seivov iari
Odvaro^, Betvov ia-Ti (f>vy^, Setvov XoiSopla, 8eivov
5 irevLU' (fyevyere dv8p€<;, irdpeiaiv ol TroXe/jbioi,^'
epovfiev (rot " direXde, (T€avra> jxavrevov rjfiel^
TOVTO fxovov rifidprofiev, oti tocovtov KardaKOTrov
eVf/iTTO/iei/."
6 Upo aov KardaKOTra dvocnaXeX'i Aioyivi]<i
aXXa rj/jLiv dirriyyeXKev. Xeyei oti 6 ddvaro^ ovk
€(TTi KaKov, ovSe yap al(T')(^p6v' Xeyei oti dSo^ia
7 \fr6(f)0'i ecTTi fiatvop,iv(i)v dvOpcoircov. ola he irepl
TTovov, ola 8e irepl rj8ov7]<;, ola Trepl irevia'i etprjKcv
ovTO<; 6 KaTd(TK07ro<:. to he yvfivrjTevetv ^ Xeyei
OTI Kpelcrcrov iaTi 7rdar]<; 7repnrop(f)vpov' to 8 eV
acTT/ocwTft) Tre^ft) Ka9ev8eLv Xeyei oti fiaXaKCOTdTr)
8 KoiTrj €(XTLV. Kal diTohei^iv (f>epei, irepl eKdaTov
TO ddpao<i to avTov, ttjv uTapa^iav, ttjv eXevOeptav,
eiTa Kal to adyfjudriov (ttlX^ov Kal (Tvve9
(TTpafifievov. " ov8ei<;," (f)r}aiv, " TroXefito^ €yyv<;
i(TTiv' irdvTa elprjvr]<; yepei.^' irco'i, o) At6y€V€<; ; " l8ov," (prjaiv, " p-r] Ti ^e/3Xi]pai, pbrj Tl T€Tp(op,ai,
10 p,ij Tiva 7re(f)evya ;
' tout' earTiv olo<i 8el KaTaaKOTro<i,
(TV 3' 77/xty eXdoov aXXa e^ dXXcov Xeyeis.
* Bentley : yvfivdaiov dvai S : yvfx.v'bv tlvai s.
BOOK I. XXIV. 3-10
man to wrestle with. And now we are sending you
to Rome as a scout, to spy out the land.^ But no
one sends a coward as a scout, that, if he merely
hears a noise and sees a shadow anywhere, he may
come running back in terror and report " The enemy
is already upon us." So now also, if you should
come and tell us, " The state of things at Rome is fearful ; terrible is death, terrible is exile, terrible
is reviling, terrible is poverty ; flee, sirs, the enemy
is upon us ! " we shall say to you, " Away, prophesy
to yourself I Our one mistake was that we sent a man like you as a scout."
Diogenes, who before you was sent forth as a scout,
has brought us back a different report. He says,
"Death is not an evil, since it is not dishonourable
"
; he says, " 111 repute is a noise made by
madmen." And what a report this scout has made
us about toil and about pleasure and about poverty
!
He says, "To be naked is better than any scarlet
robe; and to sleep on the bare ground," he says, "is the softest couch." And he offers as a proof of
each statement his own courage, his tranquillity, his freedom, and finally his body, radiant with health
and hardened. "There is no enemy near," says
he; "all is full of peace." How so, Diogenes?
" Why, look ! " says he, " I have not been struck
with any missile, have I, or received any wound ? I have not fled from anyone, have I
? " This is what it means to be a proper scout, but you return
and tell us one thing after another. Will you not
^ Domitian had banished the philosophers from Rome ; ihe young man is, therefore, being sent from Nicopolis to
learn what is going on there that might be of interest to the cause of philosophy. VOL. I. G '-S3
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovK atreKeva-r) irakiv kcu 6\Jrei aKpi^iarepov Si^a
tt}? 86iXLa<i ; 11 Tt ovv TToiijao) ; —Ti iroiel^;, eK ttXolov otuv
e^ir)<i ;
/jlj] ti to TrrjSdXcov aipei^, fir] tl to.^ KooTTWi ; TL ovv otpei^ ; to, ad, ttjv \r)Kv6ov, ttjv
TTtjpav. Kol vvv av TJ<i fiefivrjfxevoi; twv awv,
12 ovheTTOTe tcov aWoTpicov civtittohJcttj. Xiyet, aoi " 6e<i Trjv TrXarvarj/xov" IBov aTevocrr^jio^. " def
Koi Tavrrjv ' ISoi) i/uLUTiov fiovov. "6€<; to Ip-aTiov-'*
13 IBov yv/j,v6<;. " aXXa ^Oovov fxOL Kiv€t<;.^* \a^e
TOivvv o\ov TO acofiiiTiov. M Bvva/jLai pl'^ai to
14 aeofiaTiov, €Ti tovtov (^o^ovput ; dWa KXrjpovopov
fi OVK diroXeiylrei. tL ovv ; eTreXaOop^rjp
OTt TovTcov ovBev €p,ov r)v ; Treo? ovv €p,d avTO,
Xeyopev ; tu? tov Kpd^aTTOv iv to) 'TravhoKeicp, av ovv iravBoKev^ aTroOavoov dTroXlirj] aoc tou?
Kpa^aTTOVi' av B dXXu>, iKelvo^ ^^€t, av SdXXov
16 ^r7Tr;'<Tet9" dv ovv p,r) €vpr}<;, ')(ap,a\ KOipi^arj fwvov
OappSiv Kal peyKwv Kal fiep.vr}p€vo<; OTi iv TOi^
irXovaioi^ Kal ^aaiXevai Kal TvpdvvoK al TpaywSiat
TOTTOv e')(^ovatv, ovBel^ Be 7revrj<i TpayayBcav
16 avp,TrXr}pol el /j-rj o)? 'X.opevTi]^;. ol Be fiaaiX€C<;
dp-^ovTai p.ev dir dyaQtav
aTeyfruTe B(op,aTa'
eiTa irepi TpiTov rj TeTapTov p,epo<;'
tft) K.tdaipcov, TL fi eBexov ;
^ The reference must be to the Emperor Doraitian, but
Epictetus discreetly uses no name.
* Worn by senators. ' Worn by knights.
* Worn by ordinary citizens. ' From an unknown play.
154
BOOK I. XXIV. 1 0-16
go away again and observe more accurately, without
this cowardice ? What am I to do, then ? —What do you do when
you disembark from a ship? You do not pick up the
rudder, do you, or the oars ? What do you pick
up, then ? Your own luggage, your oil-flask, your
wallet. So now, if you are mindful of what is your
own property, you will never lay claim to that which
is another's. He ^ says to you, " Lay aside your
broad scarlet hem " * Behold, the narrow hem.^
"Lay aside this also." Behold, the plain toga.* " Lay aside your toga." Behold, I am naked.
" But you arouse my envy." Well, then, take the
whole of my paltry body. Do I any longer fear
the man to whom I can throw my body ? But he
will not leave me as his heir. What then ? Did
I forget that none of these things is my own .' How, then, do we call them "'my own"? Merely
as we call the bed in the inn "my own." If, then,
the inn-keeper dies and leaves you the beds, you
will have them ; but if he leaves them to someone
else, he will have them, and you will look for another
bed. If, then, you do not find one, you will have
to sleep on the ground ; only do so with good
courage, snoring and remembering that tragedies
find a place among the rich and among kings and
tyrants, but no poor man fills a tragic role except
as a member of the chorus. Now the kings com- mence in a state of prosperity
:
" Hang the palace with garlands "
; * then, about the third or fourth act, comes
—
" Alas, Cithaeron, why didst thou receive me ? " •
• Sophocles, Oedipus Rex, 1390. Cithaeron was the mountain
on which the infant Oedipus had been exposed to die.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
17 avhpdiroZov, irov ol (Trecjiavoi, ttov to SidSrj/jLa ; 18 ovSeif ae o)(pe\ovaiv 01 Sopucpopoi,; orav ovv eKeivoiv
TivX Trpocrl.Tj'i, TOVTcov /j,€fivr}ao, on rpaywSa) TrpoaepxV'
Ol* T&) vTroKptrf], dW' avTa> rut OlSiTToBc.
19 " dXXa futKapio^ 6 Seivw fiera iroWoiv yap
TrepLtraTeV /cdyco avyKarardTTO) ifiavrov crvv T049 7roWol<i Kol p,erd TToWoiv ireptTTaru). to he
20 Ke(l)d\ai0P' /jii/xvtjcro oti rj dvpa rjvoiKTai, /xt) yivov
rSyv iraLhiwv BecXorepo^;, dXX" o)? eKelva, orav
avTol<i pLT] dpecTKrj to irpdyjxa, Xejec " ovKert
Trai^o), Kol (TV, orav aoi (paivijTai rcva elvai
Toiavra, eliroiv " ovKeri nai^co,^* diraWdaaov,
/jL€VO)V 8e p,rj dprjvei.
Ke . 11/309 TO avro.
1 El TttUTa d\i]6ri iari koI fir) ^XaKevofxev firiS" vTTOKpivofieOa otc to dyadov tov dvdpu>-irov ev TTpoaipeaeL Kal to kukov, to, S' dWa irdvTa ovSev
irpo^ Tjixd^, Tt eVt Tapaaaoixeda, Tt eVt (po^ov/xeda;
2 irepl d i(T7rou8dKa/jLev, tovtwv i^ovcriav ovZel<i exei'
oiv e^ovaiav ol dWot exovaiv, tovtcov ovk eVi3
(TTpe^op^eOa. irolov €TC Trpdy/iia e')(^ofi6v ; —'AXXa
evTecKai fioi. —Tt croi evTeiXwfiai ; 6 Z€U9 <toi ovk
ivT€TaXTai ; ov SeScoKev aot to. fiev era aKMXvra
Kal dtrapaiTohLaTa, Ta he fifj ad KwXvTa Kal
4 TrapaTTohtcTTd ; Tiva ovv evToXrjV ey^oav eKeWev
' That is, rules of conduct which will guide the inquirer
in dealing with these two classes of things.
156
BOOK I. XXIV. 17-XXV. 4
Slave, where are your crowns, where your diadem ? Do your guards avail you not at all ? When,
therefore, you approach one of those great men,
remember all this—that you are approaching a tragic
character, not the actor, but Oedipus himself.
"Nay, but so-and-so is blessed; for he has many
companions to walk with." So have I ; I fall in line
with the multitude and have many companions to walk with. But, to sum it all up : remember that
the door has been thrown open. Do not become a greater coward than the children, but just as they
say, "1 wont play any longer," when the thing
does not please them, so do you also, when things seem to you to have reached that stage, merely say, " I won't play any longer," and take your departure ; but if you stay, stop lamenting.
CHAPTER XXV
Upon the same theme
If all this is true and we are not silly nor merely
playing a part when we say, " Man's good and
man's evil lies in moral choice, and all other things
are nothing to us," why are we still distressed and
afraid .'' Over the things that we seriously care for no one has authority ; and the things over which
other men have authority do not concern us. What
kind of thing have we left to discuss } —" Nay, give
me directions." ^ —What directions shall I give you ? Has not Zeus given you directions? Has he not
given you that which is your own, unhindered and
unrestrained, while that which is not your own is subject to hindrance and restraint? What direc-
»S7
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
€\7]\v0a<;, TTolov Sidray/ia ; ra aa rrjpei, ck iravTo^
rpoTTOV, rwv aWorpnov jxtj e(j)i€ao- to Triarov
crov, TO alSij/jLOv aov^ Tt? ovv dcfyeXeadai Svvarai
<TOV Tavra ; ri^ KcoXvaei 'x^prjadai avTOi<; aXXo<;
el firj av ; av he ttw? ; oTav irepl ra /xt} cravrou
6 GTrovhdcrr]<i, ra uavrov UTTCoXeaa^. TOiavTa<i
e^f^v v7roOt]Ka<; /cal ivToXa^; irapa tov At09 Trota? erLvap ep-ov OiXea ; /cpeiaacov elpl eKeivov,d^io6
iriaroTepof; ; dWd rai^ra? rrjpoiyv dWcov tivS>v
TrpoaSep ; aXX' €Kelvo<; ovk ivreraXjac ravra ; (f)€pe rds 7rpo\7]yfr€i^, (fyepe Taq d'!ro8ei^ei<; Ta9
TMv (f)i\oa6(f)cov, (fiepe a TroWdxt^ T]KOV(ra<;, (f)epe 5' a eiTTa'i avTOf;, (pepe a dveyva^f, <f)€p€ a
i/j,€\eT'rjcra<;. 7 Mexpt'i ovv Tivo<i ravra rrjpeiv KaXM<i €\ei Kal
8 rrjv iraihidv p-rj Xveiv ; p,e)(pt<; av Kop.f^(x)<i Bie^dyrjrai.
ev Xaropva\loi<i XeXojx^v j3acn\ev<;'
eBo^e jdp irat^at raurrjv rrjv iraiBidv. irpoardaaei
" (TV Trie, (TV Kepaaov, av acrov, (tv aireXde, av
iXOe." VTraKovQ), "va purj trap'' ifie Xvrjrai r] iraiBid.
9 " dXXd av viroXdpb^ave ort ev KaKol<i et." ou^
v7roXap,^dv(i)' Kal ti? yu.' dvajKaaei viroXap-^d10
veiv ; rrdXiv avvedep-eOa iral^ai ra rrepl 'A7ap.epvova
Kal ^ A-^^iXXea. Kararayel^ ^ Ayap,€/j,v(i}v
Xeyei fioi " iropevov tt/jo? rov ^A'^iXXea Kal
11 dTToairaaov rrjv BptcTT^tSa. " TTopevopui. " epxov."
ep'x^ofiai. 0)9 yap eVt roov viroOeriKWV X6y(ov
^ rh alSvfjLov a6v supplied by Upton from his 'codex.'
1 The idea seems to be that all these preconceptions,
demonstrations, etc., will be found to be based upon the " promptings and directions" of Zeus. 158
BOOK I. XXV. 4-1
1
tions, then, did you bring with you when you came
from him into this world, what kind of an order ? Guard by every means that which is your own, but
do not grasp at that which is another's. Your
faithfulness is your own, your self-respect is your
own ; who, then, can take these things from you .' Who but yourself will prevent you from using them ? But you, how do you act ? When you seek earnestly
that which is not your own, you lose that which is your own. Since you have such promptings and
directions from Zeus, what kind do you still want
from me? Am I greater than he, or more trust- worthy? But if you keep these commands of his,
do you need any others besides ? But has he not
given you these directions? Produce your preconceptions,
produce the demonstrations of the
philosophers, produce what you have often heard,
and produce what you have said yourself, produce
what you have read, produce what you have
practised.*
How long, then, is it well to keep these precepts
and not to break up the game ? As long as it is played pleasantly. At the Saturnalia a king is chosen by lot ; for it has been decided to play this game. The king gives his commands : " You drink,
you mix wine, you sing, you go, you come." I obey, so as not to be the one to break up the game.
" Come, suppose that you are in an evil plight." I do
not so suppose ; and who is there to compel me so to suppose ? Again, we have agreed to play the story
of Agamemnon and Achilles. The one who has
been appointed to play the part of Agamemnon says
to me, " Go to Achilles, and drag away Briseis." 1 go. He says, "Come," and I come. For as we
159
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ava(TTp€(f)6fi€0a, ovtco<; Set koI iirl rov /Stou. " ecTTO) vij^." e<TT(t>- " tl ovv ; rjfiepa iariv ; "
12 ov eXa^ovyap viroOeaiv rov vvKra elvai. " ecrrco ae vTToXafjL^dveiv on vv^ eariv." ecrro). " aWa
13 Kot vTToka^e on vv^ ianv." ovk aKo\ov6el t^
VTTodeaei. owtci)? kuI ivravSa. " eartw ere elvai
BvcTTV^r]" ecTTft). " ap' ovv aTV)(r](i el ; " vaL " Tt ovv ; KUKoBai/xovei^ ; " vai. " dWa koI v-noXa^e
on iv KaKol<i el." ovk aKoXovdel ttj vTrodeaer
KUi, aXXos fie KcoXvei.
14 Me;^p6 TTOCTOV ovv vTraKOVcrreov toc<; TOiovTOi<i ; /xe')(pL<i av OV XvcrtTeXfj, tovto S* eanv fiexpt'i ^v
16 ov am^co to Trpeirov koI KaTaXXtjXov. Xolttov ol
fiev el(Ti KaKavarrjpoi ^ Kal KUKoaTOfiaxoi ical Xeyovaiv " 670) ov Svva/xai irapa tovtw Senrvelv,
Xv avTov dve')(Ofiat Kad^ r/fi^pav Scrjyovfievov, ttco? ev Mucrta eTroXefirjcrev. ' Sn]yr)(Td/j,r}v aoi, d8eX(f)e,
7r«M9 eTTt Tov X6(jiOV dve^TjV irdXiv dp-)(oiMai
16 iroXiopKeladai.' " aXXo<i Xeyei " iyoo Senrvfjaai
OeXw fjLoXXov Kol aKoveiv avTOV oaa OeXei dSoXe17
<7%oi)vTO<?." Kal av (TvyKpive TavTa<; Ta<i a^ia<i' fiovov fitjSev ^apovfjL€vo<; iroiei, fir) dXi^ofievo^ /ir]8'
VTToXafi^dvoiv ev kukoi^ elvar tovto yap ovhei<i ae
18 dvayKa^ei. Kairvov TreiroLrjKev ev t^ oIkt^/miti ;
^ Wendland : KarcLvar-qpoi S.
^ That is, we accept our hypothesis as long as we can do
so in reason ; so in life we must be guided by reason.
* A reverent form of reference to Zeus. See also I. .30, 1.
' The course of argument seems to be : I can assume that
it is night and reason in a manner consistent with that assumption ; but if it really is day, I cannot assume that it 160
BOOK I. XXV. 11-18
behave in the matter of hypothetical proposals, so we ought to behave in life also.^ " Let it be
night." So be it. "What then? Is it day?"
No, for I have accepted the assumption that it is night. "Let us suppose that you assume it to be
night" So be it. " But go on and assume that it w
night," That is not consistent with the hypothesis.
So also in the present case. " Let us suppose that
you are unhappy." So be it, "Are you, then,
unfortunate?" Yes. "What then? Are you
troubled with ill-fortune ? " Yes. " But go on and
assume that you are in a wretched plight." That
is not consistent with the hypothesis ; moreover,
there is Another ^ who forbids me so to think.'
How long, then, should we obey such commands ? As long as it is beneficial, and that means, as long
as I preserve what is becoming and consistent.
Further, some men are unduly crabbed and have too
sharp tongues and say, " I cannot dine at this fellow's house, where 1 have to put up with his telling every day how he fought in Moesia: ' I have
told you, brother, how I climbed up to the crest of
the hill; well now, I begin to be besieged again.'"
But another says, " I would rather dine and hear
him babble all he pleases." And it is for you to compare these estimates ; only do nothing as one
burdened, or afflicted, or thinking that he is in a wretched plight ; for no one forces you to this. Has some one made a smoke in the house ? If he
really is night, for that is no longer a mere hypothesis, but
the statement of a falsehood. I simply " play the game " as long as we are dealing with hypotheses, but must "break
op the game " if required to make a false statement about
actual facts. 161
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
av fxerpiov, fievco' av Xiav iroXvv, i^ep)(^o/jiai. rov- Tov yap /jbe/xprjadai koI Kparelv, on rj dvpd rjvoL- 19 Krai, aWa " fiT} otxei iv^iKoiroXei.^^ ovk oIkm,
" fX7}8' €1^ 'Adr]vac<;.'^ ov8' iv 'AOi]vai<i. "/".i?S' ev 20 Pdofij}.' ovh' iv Pcofjurj. *' iu Tvdpoi^ ol/ceiV oiKoi),
aXXa TToXu? p-Oi kuttvo^ (jiaiverav to iv Vvdpoi^
oIkcIv. tt7ro^ft)/?ft), oTTov p! ovhei'^ KwXixrei oiKeiv
21 CKeLvr) yap i] oiKrjai^ ttuvtI y'jvoiKrai. kuI to reXeuTaiov
'^(^iTcovdpiov, tovt eaTt to amp^dTiov, tovtov
22 avcoTepco ovSevl ovSev et<? ip,e e^ecTTiv. Sea tovto
6 Ar]p,ijTpL0<i elvrey tm Nepcovc, " aTretXet? p,oi 23 6dvaTov, croi 5' 77 (f)V(Ti(;." av Be to acop,dTiov
0avp,daco, SovXov ep.avTov irapahehaiKa' av to
24 KTrjcreiSiov, SovXov. ev6v<; yap avT6<; kut ep^avTov
BijXS), TLVi aXtuTo? elp,i. (W9 o(f)i<; iav avaira tyjv
Ke(f>aXj]V, X67&) " eKelvo avTov rvirre o (fivXaacret."
/cal av yLyv(0(7Ke, on b av (fivXacraeiv ideXrjii, KaT
25 eKelvo eTn^rjcreTai aoi 6 Kvpio<i. tovtcov pbepvrjp^eva
TLva €tl KoXaKevaei^; 7) (pojSrjcTT} ; 26 'AXXa OeXco KadrjaOat. ottov at crvyKXrjriKoL—
'Opa<i OTt av aavTU) arevo)(^copiav 7rape)(et,<i, av
27 aavrov 6Xi^ei<i
;
—Ilw? ovp aXX&)9 Oeoiptjao)
KaX(t)<i ev tm dp,<ptdedTpa) ;—"AvOpcoTre, Kal p.r) Oecopei Kal ov p,r} OXi0^<;. Tfc irpdypLara e;T^et<?
;
rj p.iKpov eK^e^ai koI d^Oeiarj^; tj}? decopla^
KuOiaov eh TOt'9 tcov avyKXijTiKcov T6'jrov<; Kal
1 A small island off Attica in the Aegean, used as a place
of exile during the Empire. The ordinary form is Fvapos.
* He refers to the grave. 162
BOOK I. XXV. 18-27
has made a moderate amount of smoke I shall stay;
if too much, 1 go outside. For one ought to remember and hold fast to this, that the door
stands open. But some one says, " Do not dwell in Nicopolis." I agree not to dwell there. '• Nor in Athens." I agree not to dwell in Athens, either.
"Nor in Rome." I agree not to dwell in Rome,
either. " Dwell in Gyara." ^ I agree to dwell
there. But to dwell in Gyara seems to me to be
like a great quantity of smoke in the house. I leave for a place where no one will prevent me from
dwelling ; for that dwelling-place stands open to every man.' And as for the last inner tunic, that
is, my paltry body, beyond thai no one has any
authority over me. That is why Demetrius said to Nero, " You threaten me with death, but nature
threatens you." If I admire my paltry body, 1 have
given myself away as a slave ; if I admire my paltry
property, I have given myself away as a slave ; for at once I show thereby to my own hurt what I can be caught with. Just as when the snake draws in
his head, I say, " Strike that part of him which he is protecting "
; so do you be assured that your master
will attack you at that point which you particularly
wish to protect. If you remember all this, whom
will you flatter or fear any more 7 But I wish to sit where the senators do.—Do you
realize that you are making close quarters for yourself, that you are crowding yourself.'—How
else, then, shall I have a good view in the
amphitheatre ?—Man, do not become spectator and
you will not be crowded. Why do you make
trouble for yourself? Or else wait a little while,
and when the show is over sit down among the seats 163
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
28 '^Xtd^ov. KadoXov 'yap exelvov fiefjivrjao, oti
eavTov^ dXi^ofiev, eauTov^ crTevo)(^copou/j,€v, tout'
€<TTLv ra hoyfiara i^/uud^ dXijSei, kol o-Tei/o%&)pet. 29 eTrel Tt iartv avro to XotSopelcrOai ; irapaara.'i
XlOov XoiSoper xal ri iroirjaeL'i ; av ovv Tt? co? \i6ofi UKOVT], ri 6^eXo<i rfo Xothopovvri ; av 8' ^XV '^V^ daOiveiav tov XoiSopovfievov 6 XoiBoptov
30 evi^ddpav, Tore dvvet Tt. " Trepicrxt^o-ov avTov.^^
Ti Xiyei<; avrov ; to Ip^driov Xd^e, Trepla-^^KTov, 31 " v^piv (TOi TreTTolrjKa.^' KoXco^i aoi jeuocro. rav- ra efieXera XcoKpdTrj^, Bid tovto ev ^X^^
TrpoacoTTOv del SiereXec. rj/xelf: 8e deXo/xev Trdvra
fidXXov dcTKeiv Kal pLeXerdv rj oirwi dirapairo32
StaTOt Kal iXevOepoi iao/xeOa. " irapdho^a Xelyovatv
01 (f)iX6(T0(f)0L." iv Be Tat? dXXai^ re')(yat,<; ovK ecTTi irapdho^a ; Kal ti irapaBo^orepov icrriv
rj KevTelv Ttvo? tov 6(f)daXfi6v, iva iBr] ; el Tt? direipw tmv larpLKoiiv tovto elirev, ovk av KaTC33
yeXa tov XeyovTo^ ; tl ovv Oavpaarov el Kal iv
(j)LXo(70(f)i.a TToXXd Tcov dXtjOcov rrapdho^a (^aiveTai
TOt? dnelpoi^
;
Kf . Tt? /Stei)Ti«ro? v6po<i /
1 *Avaytyv(t)aKovTO^ Be tou? vrrodeTiKOv^ 6(f)r)' No/to? vTTodeTiKO'i earc Kal ovTO<i to dKoXovOov
TJj vTTodecret TrapaBex^crdai. ttoXv npoTepov Be
^ One of the typical forms of argumentation upon which
the Stoics laid great stress. The subject is treated at considerable length in I. 7. 164
BOOK I. XXV. 27-xxvi. I
of the senators and sun yourself. For in general
remember this—that we crowd ourselves, we make
close quarters for ourselves, that is to say, the
decisions of our will crowd us and make us close
quarters. Why, what is this matter of being
reviled ? Take your stand by a stone and revile it
;
and what effect will you produce? If, then, a man
listens like a stone, what profit is there to the
reviler? But if the reviler has the weakness of the
reviled as a point of vantage, then he does
accomplish something. "Strip him." Why do you
say ' him ' ? Take his cloak and strip that oflP. " I have outraged you." Much good may it do you ! This is what Socrates practised, and that is why he
always wore the same expression on his face. But
we prefer to practise and rehearse anything rather
than how to be untrammelled and free. "The
philosophers talk paradoxes," you say. But are there not paradoxes in the other arts ? And what
is more paradoxical than to lance a man in the eye in order that he may see .'' If anyone said this to a man who was inexperienced in the art of surgery,
would he not laugh at the speaker ? What is there
to be surprised at, then, if in philosophy also many
things which are true appear paradoxical to the
inexperienced ? CHAPTER XXVI
What is the rule of life ? As some one was reading the hypothetical arguments,^
Epictetus said, This also is a law governing
hypotheses—that we must accept what the hypothesis
or premiss demands. But much more important is 165
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
POfjiO'i ^i(OTtK6<i icTTiv ovro<; to aKoXovOov rfi 2 (f)vaei rrpdrreiv. el jnp eVt 7rdar]<; v\r)<; Kol irepiaracreo)?
^ov\o^e9a rijprjcrai to Kara (^vaiv, hrfKov
OTL iv ttuvtI aTO\aaTeov rov p-qre to aKoXovOov
r)p.a^ iK(f)vye2v fiyjre irapahe^aadai to fiaxofievov.
3 TTpMTOv ovv iirl Trj<i decopCa^ yv/jLvd^ovcriv ^fid<; OL (f)lX0(T0<p0l OTTOV pUOV, cItU OVTCO^ cVt TO, ')(^a\eTrd)Tepa dyovatv evTavOa <ydp ouSev iaTi to
dvOekKov 6t)<i Trpo^ to aKoXovOrjcrai TOt? BiSacTKOfxevoL<i,iTrl
he twv /Skotlkcov iroWd to, irepiaircovTa.
4 lyeXoto? ovv 6 Xeyayp Trpo)Tov ^ovXeadai eV e'/cet- vQ>v ov yap pdhiov dp-^eadai diro tmv ;)^aXe7r&)- 5 Tepcov. Kol tovtov aTToXoyiap,ov e8et (fiipeiv Trpo?
Toi)? yove?<i Tou'i dyavaKTOuvTW^ irrl too ^iXoao^elv
Ttt T€Kva. " ovKovv d/xapTdvfo, TrdTep,Ka\ ovk olSa
TO iiTi/BdXXov ifiavTO) koI TrpoafjKOV el fiev ouSe
fiadrjTov ecTTiv ovSe StSaKTov, tI fioi eyKaXel<i
;
el Be BiBuKTov, 8i8a(TK€' el 8e av /irj Svvacrai,
a(pe<; p,e fiadeiv Trapd rwv XeyovTcov elhevai. 6 €7ret Tt 8oKel<i ; oti 9e\wv TTepnrLTrTQ) kukm kol
aTroTvy')(^dv(o tov dyadov ; fir] yevoiro. Tt ovv
7 ecTTi TO acTiov tov d/xapTdveiv /j,e ; 77 dyvoia. ov
0eXei<i ovv uTroOcofiai ttjv dyvoiav ; tIvu irdiTTOTe opyr) iSiSa^e Ta Kv/SepvtjJL/cd, tu fiouaiKd ; tu
^LMTiKU ovv hid Trjv opyrjv aov SoK€i<? OTt
fiaOt](To/j.at
;
"
8 TauTtt eKeiv(p p.ov(p Xeyeiv e^ecTTi tw ToiavTrjv
9 €7n^oXi]v evrjvo)(OTi,. el he tl<; fxovov emheLKwadai
OeXoov iv avp.7roalu) oti olhev tov<; vtto- deTLKoif^ dvaytyvcoaKei TavTa Kal irpoaep^eTat
166
BOOK I. XXVI. 1-9
the following law of life—that we must do what
nature demands. For if we wish in every matter and
circumstance to observe what is in accordance with
nature, it is manifest that in everything we should
make it our aim neither to avoid that which nature
demands, nor to accept that which is in conflict with
nature. The philosophers, therefore, exercise us
first in the theory where there is less difficulty, and
then after that lead us to the more difficult matters;
for in theory there is nothing which holds us back
from following what we are taught, but in the
affairs of life there are many things which draw us away. He is ridiculous, then, who says that he
wishes to begin with the latter ; for it is not easy to begin with the more difficult things. And this is the defence that we ought to present to such parents
as are angry because their children study philosophy. " Very well then, father, I go astray, not knowing
what is incumbent upon me or what my duty is. Now if this is a thing that can neither be taught nor
learned, why do you reproach me ? But if it can be
taught, teach me ; and if you cannot do this, allow
me to learn from those who profess to know.
Really, what is your idea ? That I intentionally fall into evil and miss the good ? Far from it ! VVhat,
then, is the cause of my going astray? Ignorance.
Very well, do you not want me to put away my
ignorance ? Whom did anger ever teach the art of
steering, or music ? Do you think, then, that your
anger will make me learn the art of living? " Only he can so speak who has applied himself
to philosophy in such a spirit. But if a man reads
upon the subject and resorts to the philosophers
merely because he wants to make a display at a 167
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TOt? ^i\ocro(fioi<i, ovTO<i aWo ri irpdaaei r) Xva avTov crvyKXrjTiKo^ irapaKaTaKel/nevo^i dav/xdar} ; 10 eKet yap tw ovti al fxeydXai vXai elcri kcu ol evOdhe irXovTOt exel iraiyvia SoKovacv. 8ta tovTo
€«et SvcKoXov Kparrjaai tcov avrov (pavraaiayv,
11 OTTOU rd eKcreiovTa^ /xeydXa. iyd) riva olSa
Kkaiovra EiiracppoBiTOv tcov yovdrcov aTTTOfievov
Kal XeyovTa TaXanrcopelv d7roXeXeL(f)0ai yap
avTa> fiTjSev, el firj eKarov TrevTiJKOvra p,vpid8a<;.
12 Tt ovv o 'EjTra(f>p6BiT0<; ; KareyeXacrev cl)? vp,et<; ; ov dXX^ eTTiOavfidaa^ Xkyei " raXa?, ttw? ovv
€crtft)7ra9, ttco? €KapTepec<i ; "
13 Tapd^a<; ^ 8e rbv dvayiyvaxTKOvra tov<; virodeTiKov<i
Kal yeXdaavro<i tov vTToOefievov avra ttjv
dvdyvcoaiv SeauToO, e<prj, KarayeXd'^' ov irpoeyvp,vacra<i
tov veaviaKov ovK eyvoi<; el Svvarai touTOi?
rrapaKoXovdelv, dXX' 009 dvayvcoaTj) avrw
14 XPV'^ "^^ ^^^> ^i'V' H'V ^ BwafievT) Biavola crvfi- TreirXey/jLevov eTri/cptcrei irapaKoXovOelv eiraivov
TTLCTTeuofMev, '^oyov iricrTevo^iev, eiriKpiaiv irepX
TOiv KaXco^ rj KaKco<; yivofievcov ; Kav Tiva kuko)^
Xeyr), ovto<; e7ri<TTpe(f>eTai, Kav eiraivfi Tiva, eiraipcTai
; iv rot? ovt(o<; fiiKpol<; fit] evpicTKOiV to
15 ef/}? ; avTri ovv dp^rj tov (f}iXo(TO(f)eLV, atadrjai^;
tov ISlou rjyefiOviKOv 7rft)9 e;^ef /iera yap to
^ Schweighauser: iKe7 6vtu S. * Schenkl : . . pd^as S.
* Upton : XP« S- * Schweighauser : rrjt S.
^ i.e., in the simple life of Nicopolis it is easy to use philosophic
doctrines to live by ; in Rome the temptation is strong
to use them for achieving social distinction.
* That is, the reason ; compare note on I. 15, 4. 168
BOOK I. XXVI. 9 -IS
banquet of his knowledge of hypothetical arguments,
what else is he doing but trying to win the admiration
of some senator sitting by his side ? For there in
Rome are found in truth the great resources, while
the riches of Nicopolis look to them like mere
child's-play.^ Hence it is difficult there for a man
to control his own external impressions, since the
distracting influences at Rome are great. I know a
certain man who clung in tears to the knees of
Epaphroditus and said that he was in misery ; for he
had nothing left but a million and a half sesterces. What, then, did Epaphroditus do ? Did he laugh at him as you are laughing ? No ; he only said, in a tone of amazement, " Poor man, how, then, did you
manage to keep silence ? How did you endure it 'f " Once when he had disconcerted the student who
was reading the hypothetical arguments, and the one who had set the other the passage to read laughed
at him, Epictetus said to the latter, " Vou are laughing at yourself. You did not give the young
man a preliminary training, nor discover whether he was able to follow these arguments, but you treat him merely as a reader. Why is it, then,'' he added,
"that to a mind unable to follow a judgement upon
a complex argument we entrust the assigning of
praise or blame, or the passing of a judgement upon
what is done well or ill .' If such a person speaks ill of another, does the man in question pay any attention
to him, or if he praises another, is the latter elated .'' when the one who is dispensing praise or blame is unable, in tnatters as trivial as these, to find the
logical consequence } This, then, is a starting point
in philosophy—a perception of the state of one's own
governing principle 2; for when once a man realizes
169
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
yvcovai on dadevw ovk en deXrjaei ')(prjadai 16 avru) Trpo? ra /jueydXa. vvv Be /j,r) Svvd/jLevoi
nve<i TOP yfrcj/jLov Karairiveiv avura^iv dyopd-
(TavTe<i etri^aWovrat eaOtetv. 8id rovro ifMOvaiv
T) 'iTTeiTTOiXTLV elxa crTp6<f)0L Koi Kardppoiat koL
17 nrvpeTot. eSet S' €(f)i(TTdv€iv, el BvvavraL. dW
iv p,ev dewpia pahiov e^eXey^ai rov ovk elhora,
ev he T0i9 Kara rov ^lov ovre irape-xei eavrov
18 n<i i\eyx<p '^ov r e^eXey^aira fjnaovpLev. 6 Be
XcoKpdr7}<i eXeyev dve^eraaTov ^iov firj ^rjv.
K^'. nocra;^w9 al (pavTacrlai ylvovraL /cat riva
TTpo^^^eipa TTpo'i avra<i ^ ^or}di]/j,aTa irapaaKevaareov
;
1 TeT/3a;^&)? al (^avraaiat ylvovrai tj/jliv 17 yap
ean nvd Kai ovru)<i ^aiverai r) ovk ovra ovSe (fiaiverai
on eanv r) ean Kal ov ^aiverai yj ovk ean
2 Kal (paLverai. Xolttop iv irdao rovTOfi evcrrox^tv
epyov icrn rov rreTraLSevp-evov. 6 n B dv rj to
dXl^ov, eKeiv(p Bel irpoadyeiv ttjv ^oi)6eiav. el ao<picrp,aTa rifid<i Ilvppooveia Kal ' AKaoifpaLKa
rd d\ij3ovTd eaTiv, eKeivoi^ irpocrdycopiev rrjv 3 ^oi]Oetav el al rcou irpayixdTfov iridavoTrjTe'i,
KaO' a9 (f)aU>€Tai Tiva dyadd ovk ovra, eKel Tr)v
^orjOeiav ^TjTM/j.ei'' el e9o<i eaTl to dXt^ov, 7rpo<;
^ Meibom (after Wolf) : oiiri S.
^ cf. Plato, Apology, 38 A : 6 Se avi^eraaTos 0ios ov ffiaiTbs
170
BOOK I. XXVI, 1 5- XXVII. 3 that it is weak, he will no longer wish to employ it upon great matters. But as it is, some ^^ho are unable to swallow the morsel buy a whole treatise
and set to work to eat that. Consequently they
throw up, or have indigestion ; after that come colics and fluxes and fevers. But they ought first to have
considered whether they have the requisite capacity.
However, in a matter of theory it is easy enough to confute the man who does not know, but in the affairs of life a man does not submit himself to confutation,
and we hate the person who has confuted us. But
Socrates used to tell us not to live a life unsubjected
to examination.^
CHAPTER XXVn.
In how many ways do the external impressions arise, and
what aids should we have ready at hand to deal
with them ? The external impressions come to us in four ways
;
for either things are, and seem so to be ; or they are
not, and do not seem to be, either ; or they are, and
do not seem to be ; or they are not, and yet seem to be.
Consequently, in all these cases it is the business of
the educated man to hit the mark. But whatever be
the thing that distresses us, against that we ought
to bring up our reinforcements. If the things that
distress us are sophisms of Pyrrho and the Academy,
let us bring up our reinforcements against them
;
if they are the plausibilities of things, whereby we
are led to think that certain things are good when
they are not, let us seek reinforcements at that
point ; if the thing that distresses us is a habit,
171
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
4 eKcivo TTjv ^orjOeLav avevpicTKeiv ireipareov. ri ovv 7rpo<i hdo^ eariv evplcrKecv ^otjOrjpa ; to
5 evavTiov edo<i. aKoveL<i twv ISiootcov XeyovTcov " TaXa<i €K€ivo<i, aireOavev' dircoXeTO 6 Trarrjp
avTOv, Tj fi7]Tr]p- i^eKOTTt], aWa Kal acopo^ Kal
6 eirl ^ivrjf;. ' dfcovaov twv ivavrtav Xoycov, airocnaaov
aeavTov rovrtov t(ov (pcouMv, avTide^ rG> eOei TO evavTLOv e^o?. tt/jo? tov<; ao(f)LaTiKOv<i
Xoyov; to, XoyiKa koi ttjv iv rovroi^ yv/jLvaaiav
Kal TpL^rjv, irpo'i Ta<i tcov irpayfiaTcov mdavoTrjTa<;
ra.<i itpo\rjy^€i<i €vapyel<; icrfi')]y/jieva<; Kal
iTpo-)(eipov<i e^eiv Set.
7
' Orav ddvaro<i (^aivqrai, KaKov} trpoyeipov
eyeiv OTi TO, KaKCL eKKXlveiv KadrjKei Kal dv8
ayKalov o ddvaTOf. ri yap ironjaco ; irov yap
avTov (f>vy(o ; eaTco ifie elvai ^apTrrjSova top
Tov Aiof, "v ovTco<; yevvat,Q)<i eiTTOi " direXdibv
fj avTo<i dpcarevcrat OiXco rj aXXw Trapaaxeiv
a(f)op/jLr]v TOV dpicrTevaar el fiy Bvvafiai, KaTopOoicrai
tl avT6<;, ov (f)dovrjcrQ) aXXw tov Troirjaac
TL yevvaiov" eaTco TavTa inrep rj/xd^i, eKelvo ov
9 TTLTTTet €49 r)/j,d<; ; Kal irov ^vyco tov OdvaTOv ; /jLrjvvaaTe fiot ttjv yoapav, firjvvcraTe dvOpcoirov^,
et9 ov<; direXdoi, et? ov<i ov Trapa/BdXXei, /MrjvvaaTe
» Meibom (after Wolf) : KoKhf S.
^ And therefore not an evil.
^ A paraphrase of Homer, Iliad, XII. 328. 172
BOOK I. XXVII. 3-9
we should try to hunt up the reinforcements with
which to oppose that. What reinforcements, then,
is it possible to find with which to oppose habit ? Why, the contrary habit. You hear the common
folk saying, " That poor man ! He is dead ; his
father perished, and his mother ; he was cut off, yes,
and before his time, and in a foreign land." Listen
to the arguments on the other side, tear yourself
away from these expressions, set over against one
habit the contrary habit. To meet sophistic arguments
we must have the processes of logic and the
exercise and the familiarity with these ; against the
plausibilities of things we must have our preconceptions
clear, polished like weapons, and ready at hand.
When death appears to be an evil, we must have
ready at hand the argument that it is our duty to avoid evils, and that death is an inevitable thing.^
For what can I do .' Where shall I go to escape
it? Suppose that I am Sarpedon the son of Zeus,
in order that I may nobly say, as he did : " Seeing
that I have left my home for the war, I wish either
to win the prize of valour myself, or else to give someone else the chance to win it ; if I am unable
to succeed in something myself, I shall not begrudge
another the achievement of some noble deed." * Granted that such an act as Sarpedon's is beyond us, does not the other alternative fall within the
compass of our powers ? ^ And where can I go to escape death ? Show me the country, show me the
people to whom I may go, upon whom death does
not come ; show me a magic charm against it. If
* i.e., if we cannot act as nobly as Sarpedon, we can
at least think rationally about death, coanting it no evlL173
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
i7raoiBi]V el firj e;^<»> rt fie dekere Troielv ; ov
10 8vva/xai rov ddvarov dirocfivyeiv to (po^eicrdai
avTov fir} d7ro(pvy(o, aX-V diro6dv(a irevdoyv koX
rpifiodv ; avrr) yap yevecn<; 7rddov<i deXeiv tl koX
11 /x.^ yiveaOat. evOev av /jlcv Bvvco/j.ai to, eKTO'i fieTartBevao irpo'? Tqv ^ovXrjdiv rr}V e/iavTOV,
fierariOrifir el Be fii], rov efiTroBl^ovTa cktv12
(f>Xco(Tac OeXo). 7re(pvKe yap 6 avdpoiiro^ firj birofieveiv
d^aipeiaOai rov dyadov, /irj VTro/ievecp
13 TrepLTTiTneiv tm kuku). eira to TeXevralov, otuv
fii]T€ TO, Trpdy/iara fieraOeivac 8vvt]0<o fir]T€ top
ifiTToBl^ovTa iKru(f)X(t)aat, Kadrjfiai koI arevco kuI
ov Svvafiai XotBopco,- rov Ata Kal rov<; deov^ tou^
aXXov<;' el yap firj eirtarpe^iovraL fiov, Tt i/iol Kal
14 avTol^ ; " vat' dXX^ dae^rjf earj. tl ovv fioi ')(elpov earai, wv eari fiol vvv ; to avvoXov
eKeivov fie/uvfjadai, on, edv fxr) ev tm avro) rj to
eucreySe? Kal avfi(f)epov, ov SvvaTai acodijvat to
eu<re/Qe? ev tivl. Tavra ov BoKel erreLyovra ; 15 'E/j^eo-^o) Kal diravTaTOi Hvpp(t)veio<; Kal 'A/taBijfiaLKO^;.
eycid /nev yap to ifiov fiepo<i ovk ayco
(T')(oXr]V TTyOO? TavTa ovBe Bvvafiai avvrjyoprjaai
16 Tjj crvvijdeia. el Kal Trepl dypiBlov rrpay/idTiov
elxov, dXXov dv jrapeKaXecra rov crvvrfyoprjcrovTa.
17 Tivi ovv dpKovfiat ; raJ KaTO, tov tottov. tto)? filv al'aOr]ac<i ylverai, iroTepov Bt, 6X(ov r] diro
fiepov<;, iam<i ovk olBa dTToXoyicraadai, Tapdcraei
Be fxe dficfiorepa. on 8' e'7(w xal av ovk eafxev oi 18 avToi, Xiav d/c/ji/Sco? olBa. trodev tovto ; ovBe- 174
BOOK I. XXVII. 9-18
I have none, what do you wish me to do ? I cannot
avoid death. Instead of avoiding the fear of it, shall
I die in lamentation and trembling? For tlie origin
of sorrow is this—to wish for something that does not
come to pass. Therefore, if I can change externals
according to my own wish, I change them ; but if I cannot, I am ready to tear out the eyes of the man
who stands in my way. For it is man's nature not
to endure to be deprived of the good, not to endure
to fall into the evil. Then, finally, when I can
neither change the circumstances, nor tear out the
eyes of the man who stands in my way, I sit down
and groan, and revile whom I can—Zeus and the
rest of the gods ; for if they do not care for me,
what are they to me ? " Yes," you say, " but that
will be impious of you." What, then, shall I get that
is worse than what I have now .' In short, we must
remember this—that unless piety and self-interest
be conjoined, piety cannot be maintained in any man. Do not these considerations seem urgent ? Let the follower of Pyrrho or of the Academy
come and oppose us. Indeed I, for my part, have no leisure for such matters, nor can I act as advocate
to the commonly received opinion. If I had a petty
suit about a mere bit of land, I should have called in some one else to be my advocate. With what evidence,
then, am I satisfied ? With that which
belongs to the matter in hand. To the question
how perception arises, wliether through the whole
body, or from some particular part, perhaps I do not
know how to give a reasonable answer, and both
views perplex me. But that you and I are not the same persons, I know very certainly. Whence do I get this knowledge ? When I want to swallow
175
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TTOTC KarairLveiv ti OiXcov CKel (f}€pca top "^(o/jLov, dW a)8e' ovBeiroT aprov deXwv Xa^etv to adpov
eXaj3ov, dX)C del iirl tov dpjov ep')(pp,aL &)? irpos
19 (TKOTTov.^ v/ji€t<i S' avTol 01 Ta9 alaOrjaei<; dvaipovvTe<i
dXXo ri Trotelre ; Tt? vp,(ov et? ^aXaveiov
20 direXdelv OeXtov et? fivXcova dirrjXdev ; —Tt ovv ; ov Bet Kara hvvajjiiv koI tovtcov aj/re^ecr^at, tov
T'qprjcrai Trjv crvvrjOeiav, tov ire^pdydai 7rp6<; to, 21 KUT^ avTYj^i
;
—Kal Tt? dvTiXeyei ; dXXd tov
hwafxevov, tov a-)(pXd^ovTa' tov Se TpepovTa koX
Tapaaao/xevov Kal prjyvvp^vov ecrwdev ttjv /capBiav
dXXm Tivl 8et irpoaevKaipelv.
KT]' . "Oti ov Bel 'X^aXcTTaiveiv dvdpd)iT0L<i, kclI Tiva TO. fiiKpd Kal p.eydXa iv dvOpcoTroi^ ; 1 Tt icTTiv aiTiov TOV (TvyKaTaTtdeaOal tivl ; to
2 (f)aLvea0ai otc V7rdp-)(ei. t5> ovv (fyatvopevo) oti
ovx^ V7rdp')(^€i orvyKaTarCdeadai ov^ olov re. Bid
TL ; oTi rj <f)V(ri<i avTt)^ eVrt t% Biavolwi, Tol<i pev dXrjdeaiv iTTiveveiv, Tol<i Be y^evBeat Bvaape3
(TTelv, Trpo<i Be tu dBr)Xa e7re)(^€tv. Ti? tovtov
TTtcTTi? ; "irdde, el Bvvaaai, vvv oti vv^ e<TTtv."
ov')(^ olov TC. " diroirade oti rjp,€pa etrrti'." ou%
olov T€. " Trdde r) diroTraOe aTro tov dpTiovi
4 elvai TOv<i acrre/ja?." ov^ olov re. oTav ovv Ti,<i
' Schweighauser : lepoKoirTuv S. * Wolf : out* S.
^ The accompanying gesture explained the allusion, which was probably to the eye and the mouth, as in II. 20, 28. A Cynic like Diogenes would very likely have illustrated
his point in a somewhat coarser fashion ; and this is not
impossible in the present instance.
* The Pyrrhonists, or Sceptics,
176
BOOK I. XXVII. 18-XXV111. 4
something, I never take the morsel to that place
but to this ^ ; when I wish to take bread I never
take sweepings, but I always go after the bread as to a mark. And do you yourselves,^ who take away
the evidence of the senses, do anything else ? Who
among you when he wishes to go to a bath goes to a mill instead ? —What then ? Ought we not to the
best of our ability hold fast also to this—maintain,
that is, the commonly received opinion, and be on our guard against the arguments that seek to overthrow it ? —And who disputes that ? But only
the man who has the power and the leisure should
devote himself to these studies ; while the man who
is trembling and perplexed and whose heart is broken within him, ought to devote his leisure to
something else.CHAPTER XXVIIl
Thai me ought not to be angry with men ; and what are
the little things and the great among men ? What is the reason that we assent to anything ? The fact that it appears to us to be so. It is impossible, therefore, to assent to the thing that
appears not to be so. Why? Because this is the
nature of the intellect—to agree to what is true, to be dissatisfied with what is false, and to withhold
judgement regarding what is uncertain. What is the proof of this .' " Feel, if you can, that it is now
night." That is impossible. " Put away the feeling
that it is day." That is impossible. "Either feel or put away the feeling that the stars are even
in number." That is impossible. When, therefore,
177
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
a-vyKararidrjTai. tu> yjrevSei, taOt ore ovk rjdekcv
ylrevSei avyKaradeadar irdaa yap "^v^V UKOvaa
5 (neperai t^? aKrjOeia^, co? Xeyei YlXaTwv aWa
eho^ev avTO) to xjrevBo'; aXr)Oe<{. dye eVl Se tmv
irpd^ecov tl €-)(op,ev toiovtov olov ivddSe to
aXr]0€<i rj rb ^evSo^ ; to KaOrJKOv koX irapd to
KaOrjKov, TO av/j,(f)€pov Kal to daufX(f)opov, to kut^
6 i/xe KUi ov Kar if-ie koX oaa TOVTOi<i o/xoia. " ov hvvarat ovv Ti? SoKelv p,ev, OTt avficpipet, avTO),
1 p^rj alpeladat. B' avro ;^^ ov Svvarai. tto)? tj Xeyovcra
Kai pLavdavco p,ev ola hpdv pAWw Ka/cd,
dvp.0^ Be Kpeiacroiv rcov epboov ^ovXevpArav ; OTi avTO TOVTO, Tw dvp,(p x^cLptoraa-dai, koX
Tip,(opijaaaOaL rov dvBpa, crvp^cfyopcoTepov I'lyeirai
8 ToO (Tcoaat rd reKva. " vai' dXX! e^ijTrdrrjTai."
Bel^ov aurj] ivapyS)<i on i^rjTrdrrjTai Kal ov
TToirja-er fJ'e)(pi B' dv ov p,rf B€CKVVT}<i, rivi e;^et 9 aKoXovdrjaai rj tm (f)aivop,evQ) ; ovBevL tI ovv
^aX,e7ratWf? avTrj, on TreTrXdvTjrai rj raXaLirwpos
irepi roiv p,eyi<Tru>v Kal e^if dvn dvdpconov yeyovev
; ov)(l B\ etirep dpa, pdWov eKeel<;, Q)<i Tov<i rv(f)\ou'i ekeovpev, to? Toy? ^fuXoi;?, ouTty?
Tou? ra Kvpicorara TeTVcfiXcofievovi Kal diTOKe')((i)-
\(op,€vov<i ; 10 "Oo-Tt? ovv TovTOV fxepvtjTai Ka6apo)<i on
avOpcoTTO) perpov Trdarjf: 7rpd^eco<; to (f)aiv6p,€vov
(Xoiirov r) kuXco^ (f)aiv€rai rj KaKU)^' el /caX&i?,
^ A rather free paraphrase of Plato, Sophistes, 228 c. ^ Euripides, Medea, 1078-1079 ; translated by Way.
178
BOOK I. XXVIII. 4-IO
a man assents to a falsehood, rest assured that it was not his wish to assent to it as false ; " for every
soul is unwillingly deprived of the truth," as Plato
says ^ ; it only seemed to him that the false was true. Well now, in the sphere of actions what have we
corresponding to the true and the false here in the sphere of perceptions ? Duty and what is contrary
to duty, the profitable and the unprofitable,
that which is appropriate to me and that which is not appropriate to me, and whatever is similar to
these. " Cannot a man, then, think that something
is profitable to him, and yet not choose it ? " He
cannot. How of her who says.
Now, now, I learn what horrors I intend:
But passion overmastereth sober thought ? ^
It is because the very gratification of her passion and
the taking of vengeance on her husband she regards
as more profitable than the saving of her children.
"Yes, but she is deceived." Show her clearlv that
she is deceived, and she will not do it ; but so long as you do not show it, what else has she to follow but that which appears to her to be true ? Nothing. Why, then, are you angry with her,
because the poor woman has gone astray in the
greatest matters, and has been transformed from
a human being into a viper ? Why do you not, if anything, rather pity her? As we pity the blind
and the halt, why do we not pity those who have
been made blind and halt in their governing
faculties ? Whoever, then, bears this clearly in mind, that
the measure of man's every action is the impression
of his senses (now this impression may be formed
179
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
aveyKX7)T6<; iaTtv el KaKCO'i, avro'f e^rjfiioiTar ov Svvarai yap aXX,o<i jxev elvai 6 ireirXavrifievo^,
ak\o<i o o ^XaTTTOfievof;), ovBevl opyta-dijaerai,
ovoevl 'X^aXerrai'el, ouSiva Xoihoprjaei, ovSeva
jieix-^erai, ov fiiaijcrei, ov irpoaKoy^ei ovhevL
11 tOCTTe Kol TO, ovT(o ficyoXa Kal Seiva epya Tavrrjv
e^et TTjv ap-)(rjv, to (f>at.v6fi€i'OV ; ravTyu ov8^
12 aWrjv. rj 'lXta9 ovSiv iariv rj (pavTaata kuI
)(^P'f]cnfi (pavTaaicov. icpcivr] tw 'AXe^dvSptp airdyeiv
Tov MeveXdov tt]v yvvaiKa, i(f>din] rjj 13 EiXevrj aKoXovOrjaaL avrut. el ovv ecpdvr) rat Mez'eXaot) iraOelv oti KepSo<i earl TOiavrt]^ yvvatKo^
(TTeprjdijvat, t ai> eyivero ; diroXooXei ^
14 iX-ta? ov fxovov dXXa koX r] ^Ohvcrcreia.—'E«
roiovrov ovv /xiKpov Trpdyparo^ rjpryjTai rd
TTjXiKavTa ;—Tiva 8e teal Xeyei^i rd rrfXiKavra ; 7roXefjiov<i kol ardareKi Kal d'jT03Xeia<; ttoXXcov
dv6pcoTTMv Kal KaraaKa(pd<f TroXeoov ; Kal rt fxeya
15 6;\;et ravTa ;—Ovhev ;—Tt S' e^xei p.eya 7roXXov<;
/8o{)<? aTrodavelv Kal iroXXd irpojBaTa koI 7roXXd<;
KaXid(; ')^€XiS6v(ov rj ireXapyoiv €/n7rpT](rdr]vai Kal
16 KaTaaKa(f)r)vaL ;—-Op.oia ovv ecm ravra e«et- vot? ;
—
'O/jLOioTara. aoopara aTrcoXeTO dvdpd)-
TTCOV Kal ^ooiv Kal Trpo^dTcov. oiKrjfidria
17 iveTrprjadrj dvdpcoTrcov Kal ireXapySiv veoaaiai.
TL yikya rj Betvov ; r) hel^ov fioi tl Bia<f>epei oiKua
^ i.e., not merely does suffering always follow error, but
it is also morally unthinkable that one man's error can cause another "suffering," in the Stoic sense; or, in other words, no man can be injured (as Socrates believed ; cf. I. 29, 18) or made to "suffer" except by his own act (cf. § 23). It is this fundamental moral postulate of the Stoics which led them to classify so many of the ills of life which one person
i8o
BOOK I. XXVIII. 10-17
rightly or wrongly ; if rightly, the man is blameless ; if wrongly, the man himself pays the penalty ; for it
is impossible that the man who has gone astray, is one person, while the man who suffers is another ^),
—
whoever remembers this, I say, will not be enraged
at anyone, will not be angry with anyone, will not
revile anyone, will not blame, nor hate, nor take
offence at anyone. So you conclude that such great
and terrible things have their origin in this—the
impression of one's senses ? In this and nothing
else. The Iliad is nothing but a sense-impression
and a poet's use of sense-impressions. There came
to Alexander an impression to carry off the wife of
Menelaus, and an impression came to Helen to follow him. Now if an impression had led Menelaus
to feel that it was a gain to be deprived of such a
wife, what would have happened } We should have
lost not merely the Iliad, but the Odyssey as well.
—
Then do matters of such great import depend upon
one that is so small :—But what do you mean by
" matters of such great import " } Wars and factions
and deaths of many men and destructions of cities ? And what is there great in all this?—What, nothing
great in this.^—^'hy, what is there great in the
death of many oxen and many sheep and the
burning and destruction of many nests of swallows
or storks?—Is there any similarity between this and
that ? —A great similarity. Men's bodies perished
in the one case, and bodies of oxen and sheep in the
other. Petty dwellings of men were burned, and so were nests of storks. What is there great or dreadful about that.'' Or else show me in what
does actually cause to another as not real evils {cf. §§ 26-8),
but a5ta(J)o/ja, " things indififerent. " cf. I. 9, 13 ; I. 30, 2, etc. 181
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
dvOpooTTov Kal veocraLO. TreXapyov co? otKr]ai<;.—
18 "O/xoiov ovv icTTi TreXapyof koX avdpwiro'i ;—Ti
\ey€i<; ; Kara to acj/na OfioioTarov "jrXrjv on fiev €K hoKMv Kal Kepafiihwv Koi irXivOcov OLKohofielrai
TO, oiKiSia, r) 8' eK pd/3Scov Kal TrrjXov. 19 OvSevl ovv 8ia(f)€pei dvdpcoTTO<i -rreXapyov
;
—
Mr^ yevocTO' dXXd rouTOi? ov Sia(f)epet. —Tivc
20 ovv 8ia(f)epei
;
—Tirjrei, Kal evp-qaei';, on dXXw
Bia(f>€p€C. opa firj t& irapaKoXovdelv ol<; Troiei,
opa fir] tS> KoivcoviKO), firj rep ttkttu), tm alSj'jfiovt, 21 TG) da(f)aXe2, T&5 awerw. irov ovv to fieya iv
dvdp(i)7roi<i KaKov Kal dyadov ; ottov rj 8tacf)opd. av aoj^rjTai tovto Kal 7repiT€Tet;\;iO"/ievov fi^vrj
Kal piT) Bta(f)deLpr)Tai to alhrjpbov /j,r]8e to iriaTov
firjBe TO (TVveTov, totc aw^eTai Kal avTo^i' dv S" aTToXXvrjTai ti tovtwv Kal eKTToXiopKJjTai, totc
22 Kal avTO<i diroXXvTai. Kal to, fieydXa irpdyfiaTa
iv TovTcp ecTTiv. eTTTaicrev fxeydXa 6 'AXe-
^av8po<;, OT eTTTJXdov vavalv ^ oi "EtXXrjve'i Kal
ore iiropOovv ttjv Tpotav Kal ot€ oi dheX(^ol
23 avTov dTTcoXXvvTO ; ovSap,co<;' St' dXXoTpiov yap
epyov TTTaUi ouSet?* dXXd t6t€ ireXapySiV veocr- aial eTTopOovvTO. TTTalafia 8' ^v, otc dirooXea-e
Tov alhi^ixova, tov itkttov, tov <f)iX6^€vov, tov k6-
24 (Tfiiov. TTOT sTTTaiaev 6 'A^iXXeu? ; otc diredavev
* C. Schenkl: i-ir?i\e*^ (pacriy S. i8a
BOOK I. XXVIII. 17-24
respect a man's house and a stork's nest differ as a place of habitation. —Is there any similarity between
a stork and a man ?—What is that you say ? As far as the body is concerned, a great similarity ; except
that the petty houses of men are made of bean.s and
tiles and bricks^ but the nest of a stork is made of sticks and clay.
Dues a man, then, differ in no wise from a stork .- —Far from it; but in these matters he does not
differ. —In what wise, then, does he differ.^—Seek
and you will find that he differs in some other
respect. See whether it be not in his understanding
what he does, see whether it be not in his capacity for social action, in his faithfulness, his self- respect, his steadfastness, his security from error, his intelligence. Where, then, is the great evil and
the great good among men .' Just where the
difference is ; and if that element wherein the differ- ence lies be preserved and stands firm and well
fortified on every side, and neither his self-respect, nor his faithfulness, nor his intelligence be destroyed,
then the man also is preserved ; but if any of these
qualities be destroyed or taken by storm, then the
man also is destroyed. And it is in this sphere that
the great things are. Did Alexander come to his great fall when the Hellenes assailed Troy wim
their ships, and when they were devastating the
land, and when his brothers were dving.' Not at
all ; for no one comes to his fall because of another's
deed ; but what went on then was merely the
destruction of storks' nests. Nay, he came to his
fall when he lost his self-respect, his faithfulness,
his respect for the laws of hospitality, his decency
of behaviour. When did Achilles come to his fall ? 183
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
6 ITaTpo/cA-o? ; fir) yevotTO' aA-V ore aypyl^eTO, ore KopaaiSiov eKKaev, or eTteXdOeTO on irdpeaTiv
ovK eVl TO ipcofieva'i KTuadai, aXV eVt to irdXe- 25 fielv. TavT eaTi ra dvOpcoTriKo. TTTaiafiara, tovto
icTTiv 77 iroXiopKia, tovto iari KaTa(TKacf>r], otuv
TO, Boy/jLara to, 6p6a Ka9ai,pr)Tai, OTav eKelva
26 8ta(f)delp7]Tat.—"Orav ovv yvvaiKe^ ayoovTai koX
iraiSla al'X^fxaXwTi^rjTaL koI otuv avrol KaTacr(pd27
^(OVTUL, TavTa ovk ecTTi Kaxd
;
—Tiodev tovto
irpoaho^d^eL'i ; KUfjue BlSa^ov.—Ov' aXXa iroOev
28 av \eyeL<i oti ovk eari kuku ;—"Kkdwfxev eirX rov<i Kav6va<;, (f>ep€ Td<; iTpo\rjy^ei<i.
Ata TOVTO yap ovk eaTLV iKavw^ Oavfidcrai to
yivofxevov. ottov ^dprj Kplvai OeXofiev, ovk eiKfi 29 Kpivojxev' ottov to, evdea koI cTTpe^Xd, ovk eiKrj,
a7rXft)9 OTTOV Siacfyepei rjfiiv yvMvac to kuto, tov
TOTTOv dXijde^, ovheTTod^ 'q/jLcov ovSel^i ovSev elxfi 30 7rOl7](T€l. OTTOV Se TO TTpSiTOV KOI flOVOV aiTiov
ea-Tt TOV KUTopOovv r) d/xapTdveiv, tov evpoelv rj Bvcpoetv, TOV cLTV^^eiP r) evTv^eiv, ivddhe fiovov
eiKaloi Koi TrpoTreret?. ovhapuov ofioiov rt ^vyS,
ovSafMOV ofioiov Ti Kavovi, dWd ri €(f>dvr) /cat 31 €vdv<i TTOiw TO <^avev. Kpecaacov ydp elfii tov
^ A.yaixepivovo<i rj tov 'A^iWeox;, Xv eKelvoi /xev Sia TO aKoXovOrjaai Tol<i (f)aivofievoi,<; ToiavTa
KUKO, TTonjaoxTi Kal TTddcoaiv, ifiol 8e dpKTJ ^ to
* /t)) before apjcp deleted by Schweighiiuser.
184
BOOK I. xxviii. 24-31
When Patroclus died? Far from it; but when
Achilles himself was enraged, when he was crying
about a paltry damsel, when he forgot that he was
there, not to get sweethearts, but to make war. These are the falls that come to mankind, this is the siege of their city, this is the razing of it—when
their correct judgements are torn down, when these
are destroyed.—Then when women are driven off into captivity, and children are enslaved, and when
the men themselves are slaughtered, are not all these things evils i' —Where do you get the justi- fication for adding this opinion ? Let me know
also.—No, on the contrary, do you let me know
where you get the justification for saying that
they are not evils ? —Let us turn to our standards,
produce your preconceptions.
For this is why 1 cannot be sufficiently astonished
at what men do. In a case where we wish to judge
of weights, we do not judge at haphazard ; where
we wish to judge what is straight and what is crooked, we do not judge at haphazard ; in short,
where it makes any difference to us to know the
truth in the case, no one of us will do anything at haphazard. Yet where there is involved the first and only cause of acting aright or erring, of
prosperity or adversity, of failure or success, there
alone are we haphazard and headlong. There I have nothing like a balance, there nothing like a standard, but some sense- impression comes and
immediately I go and act upon it. What, am 1 any better than Agamemnon or Achilles —are they
because of following the impressions of their senses
to do and suff'er such evils, while I am to be
satisfied with the impression of my senses ? And
VOL. I. H ^^5
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
32 <f)aiv6/jL€Vov ; kcli TToia TpaywBia dWrjv apy^rjv
e%€« ; 'Arpei)? EuyOiTrtSou rt iariv ; to <pacv6/JLe- vov. OlSiwovi Xo<poK\eou<; tl eariv ; to (paivo- 33 fievov. ^otvt^ ; to (fiaivofievov. 'lTnr6XvT0<i
;
TO (f)aivofi€Vov, rovTOV ovv firiSe/jLtav eirtixkXeiav
TToieladai Ttvof v/xtv BoKel ; rlve^i Se Xiyovrai oi rravrl tS (f>aivofi€vq> aKo\ov6ovure<; ; —M^aivofievoi.—
nfiei<i ovv dWo tl Troiov/xev ;
kQ'. He/)* evcTTadeia^;
1 Ovcria Tov ayadov irpoaipeaif; iroid, rov kukov
2 Trpoaipecn<i iroid. ri ovv ra e'/CTO? ; vKai ttj
Trpoatpecrei, irepX a<; dvaarpecfyofievrf rev^erai rov
3 IBiov d<ya6ov rj kukov. irSi'i rov dyadov rev^erai
;
hv Ta? vXa^ /xr] Oavfidarj. to, yap irepl t(ov
iikSiV Boyfiara opda fiev ovfa dyaSrjV iroteZ rrjv
irpoaipecriv, arpefiXa Se koI SieaTpafM/neva KaKrjv.
4 TovTov TOP vofjLov 6 deo<i TcdeiKev kol <f)r](TU> " ei Tt dyadov deXec^, irapd aeavrov Xd^e." av
Xiyei<i " ov' dXXa Trap aXXov.^ fitj, dXXa irapa
6 aeavTOV. Xolttov otuv a.7r€<\^ o Tvpavvo<i Kai
fie ^ KaXfi, Xeyo) " rlvi aTreiXec ; " av Xiyrj " S^aeo
(re," (prjfu on " Tai<i '^epaXv direiXel Koi rol^
6 iroaiv." av Xeyrj " tpa'^iTJXoKO'TTrjcrw txe,' Xeyco " r(f) Tpa'X^rjXo) d-TTeiXei" av Xeyp " et? (j>vXaK^v
1 Wolf: Kal fii)S.
^ i.e., the proper control to exercise over one's haphazard
sense-impressions.
i86
BOOK I. xxvni. 31-xxix. 6 what tragedy has any other source than this ? What
is the Atreus of Euripides? His sense-impression.
The Oedipus of Sophocles ? His sense-impression.
The Phoenix ? His sense-impression. The Hippolytus
? His sense-impression. What kind of a man,
then, do you think he is who pays no attention to
this matter ^ .'' What are those men called who
follow every impression of their senses ?—Madmen.—Are
we, then, acting differently ?
CHAPTER XXIX
Of steadfastness The essence of the good is a certain kind of moral
purpose, and that of the evil is a certain kind of
moral purpose. VVhat, then, are the external
things ? They are materials for the moral purpose,
in dealing with which it will find its own proper
good or evil. How will it find the good? If it does not admire the materials. For the judgements
about the materials, if they be correct, make the
moral purpose good, but if they be crooked and
awrv, they make it evil. This is the law which God
has ordained, and He says, " If you wish any good
thing, get it from yourself." You say, " No, but
from someone else." Do not so, but get it from
yourself. For the rest, when the tyrant threatens
and summons me, I answer " Whom are you
threatening ? " If he says, " I will put you in chains," I reply, " He is threatening my hands and
my feet." If he says, "I will behead you," I answer, " He is threatening my neck." If he says, 187
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ae ^a\(o,' " o\(p tw crapKtBla)'" xav i^opiaiiov
7 aireiXfiy to avro.—Soi ovv ovhev aireiXel
;
—Et
ireiTovda oti ravra ovSeu iari 7rpb<; efie, ovBiv
8 el Be (fyo^ov/mai rt tovtcov, c/jloI aTretXel. riva
\onrov hehoLKa ; rov nvtov ovra Kvpiov ; tow iii
i/jLoi ; ov8e et? eaTtv. tmv ovk eV eyuol ; koX tL
fioi avT(ov fieXei
;
9 'Tfiei<; ovv oi (f>i.\6(T0<f)0i BiSdaKCTe /coTacppovetv
Tcov ^aatXecov ; —M^ yevoiTo. rt? rjfxwv SiSdcrKei
avTiTTOielaOat Trp6<; auTov^, (ov eKslvoi ^ e^ovaiv
10 e^ovatav ; to acofjLciTiov \d^e, ttjv KTrjaiv Xd^e,
Tr)v (f)i]fj,r)v \d6e, Tov<i irepl e'/ie Xd^e. dv Tiva^
tovtcov dvaireLOoi dvTL7roi€i(T$ai, iw ovti e.'^Ka11
\eiTw fioi. " vai' dWd kol tcov Soy/xdTcov
ap'X^eiv SeXco.^' koI ti? crot TavTtjv Ttjv e'^ovcriav BeScoKev ; ttov Bvvaaai viKijaai Boy/na dXXoTpiov
;
12 " Trpocrdycov," (fyrjatv, " avTM (pofSov viki'](T(o.'
dyvoet<i oti avTO auTo eviKr}<Tev, ov)(^ wtt' dXXov
evcKrjO^' Trpoaipecriv Be ovBev aXXo viKrjaac
13 BvvuTai, ttXtjv avTrj eavTrjv. Bia tovto koI 6 Tov 6eov v6fio<; KpdTcaT6<; cctti koI BtKai6raTo<;'
TO Kpelcraov del irepLyiveadoy tov ')(^eipovo<i. 14 " KpeiTTOV€<; elatv ol Bexa tov evo^." 7r/3o? tl ; 7rpo9 TO Brjaai, Trpos to diroKTeivai, irpb^ to
dirayayelv oirov deXovaiv, irpoi to dcpeXeadac
rd ovTa. vlkwctlv toIvvv o'l BeKa tov eva ev
15 TOUTft), ev c5 Kpeiaaove<i elaiv. ev tlvi ovv )(^eipove<;
elaiv ; dv 6 /lev e^j; BojfiaTa opOd, ol Be firj.
^ Schweighauser : twv iKtivuv S.
1 88
BOOK I. XXIX. 6-15
" I will throw you into prison," 1 say, " He is threatening my whole paltry body " ; and if he
threatens me with exile, I give the same answer.
—
Does he, then, threaten you not at all?—If I feel that all this is nothing to me,—not at all ; but if I am afraid of any of these threats, it is I whom he
threatens. Who is there left, then, for me to fear ? The man who is master of what? The things that are under my control? But there is no such man. The man who is master of the things that are not
under my control ? And what do I care for them ? Do you philosophers, then, teach us to despise our kings ? —Far from it. Who among us teaches
you to dispute their claim to the things over which
they have authority ? Take my paltry body, take
my property, take my reputation, take those who
are aliout me. If I persuade any to lay claim to these things, let some man truly accuse me. " Yes,
but I wish to control your judgements also." And
who has given you this authority ? How can you
have the f)ower to overcome another's judgement?
"By bringing fear to bear ujwn him," he says, "I
shall overcome him." You fail to realize that the
judgement overcame itself, it was not overcome by
something else ; and notliing else can overcome
moral purpose, but it overcomes itself. For this reason too the law of God is most good and most
just: "Let the better always prevail over the
worse." "Ten are better than one," you say. For
what? For putting in chains, for killing, for
dragging away where they will, for taking away a man's property. Ten overcome one, therefore, in
the point in which they are better. In what, then,
are they worse ? If the one has correct judge189
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TV ovv ; €v TouTft) BvvavTai viKrjcrai ; "rrodev ; el
S' lardfieOa iwl ^vyov, ovk eSei top ^apvrepov
KaOeKKvaai
;
16 'S,(OKpdrr]<; ovv Xva TrdOj] ravra utt' ^ Adrjvaiaiv ; —^AvSpdiroBov, ri \eyei<; to ItWKpaTrjfi ; tw? e')(ei, TO irpd'yp.a \eye' 'iv ovv to "^wKpaTovi Trpw^-
fidTiov^ dirax^fj ^al cvpy vtto twv ccr^vpoTepwv
ei? BecTficoTT]piov Kal kcoi eiov ti<; Bm to5 acopaTLO)
17 Tft) %(i)KpdTOV<i KUKelvo aTTO-yfrvyfj ^ ; raOra aoi
(f>aLV€Tai OavpacTTa, tuvtu dSiKU, eVt tovtol^
i<yKa\€t<i Tft) Oew ; ovBev ovv el^e Xa)KpdTr)<; dvTi
18 TOVTwv ; irov rjv rj ovala avTcp tov dyadov ; tlvi
Trpoo"<r%w/Lt6i/ ^ ; crol 17 avTw ; Koi tl Xeyei eKelvo<i ; "e/xe 8' "AvuTO? koI M.ekrjTO'i aTTOKTelvai pev
BvvavTui, ^Xd-^ai S' ov" fcal TrdXiv " el TavTjj
19 Tftj 6e(p (J)l\ov, TavTT) jivea-dco." dWa Bet^ov
OTi )(^elpova €)(wv BoypuTU KpaTel tov KpeuTTOVo'?
iv Boypaaiv. ov Bei^ei-i' ovS* eyyv<i. v6p,o<; yap
T^9 (f)va€a)<i Kal tov Oeov ovto<;' to Kpeiaaov aei
irepLyiveaOfo tov ')(^elpovo<i. iv tivl ; iv w Kpeiaaov
20 icTTiv. aa)p,a a(op,aT0<; laxvpoTepov, ol Tr\€LOve<i 21 TOV ev6<i, 6 xXeTTTr)!; tov p.r} kXctttov. Bia tovto
Kayo) TOV \v')(yov aTrcoXeaa, oti iv tm aypvirveiv
piov Kpelaatov rjv KXe7rTrj<;. aX,V iKelvo<i
' awfiariov the edition of Salamanca : Bentley also seems
to have questioned the word, but compare iii. i. 16.
* Koraes : avoipvyrji S.
' Schweighauser after Schegk : Trpoo-xw/i*" S.
* The interlocutor takes the case of Socrates as proving
that a question of right cannot be settled by weighing
judgements in the ordinary fashion, i.e., by counting votes.
* Plato, Apology, 30 c. 190
BOOK I. XXIX. 15-21
ments, and the ten have not. What then? Can
they overcome in this point ? How can they ? But
if we are weighed in the balance, must not the
heavier draw down the scales ? So that a Socrates may suffer what he did at the
hands of the Athenians ?
^ —Slave, why do you say
"Socrates"? Speak of the matter as it really is and say : That the paltry body of Socrates may
be carried off and dragged to prison by those who
were stronger than he, and that some one may
give hemlock to the paltry body of Socrates, and
that it may grow cold and die ? Does this seem
marvellous to you, does this seem unjust, for this
do you blame God ? Did Socrates, then, have no
compensation for this ? In what did the essence
of the good consist for him ? To whom shall we
listen, to you or to Socrates himself? And what
does he say ? " Anytus and Meletus can kill me,
but they cannot hurt me."* And again, "If so it
is pleasing to God, so let it be." ^ But do you
prove that one who holds inferior judgements prevails
over the man who is superior in point of
judgements. You will not be able to prove this;
no, nor even come near proving it. For this is a law of nature and of God : " Let the better always
prevail over the worse." Prevail in what? In that
in which it is better. One body is stronger than
another body ; several persons are stronger than one ; the thief is stronger than the man who is not
a thief. That is why I lost my lamp,* because in
the matter of keeping awake the thief was better
than I was. However, he bought a lamp for a very
» Plato, Crito, 43 d.
* See I. 18, 15. 191
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Toaovrov u>vi]aaTO \v')(yov avrX Xv^vov KXeim}^
iyevero, avrl Xv^vov diriaToii, avrl \v')(yov
6r]pici)8r]<}. TOVTO eho^ev avrcp XvcnreXetv.
22 EcTTW aXX eiXrjTTTaL /jlov Tt? rov Ifiarlov
Kai €Xk€i fi eh ttjp dyopdi/, elra iiriKpavydrover lp
aXXoi " <f)iXoao(pe, ri ae co(f)iXr]Ke to, Soyfjuira ; Loov crvpr) el<i to Secr/xcorrjpiov, l8ov fMiXXei^i 23 rpaxv^OKOTreladai. ' xal iroiav eirpa^a av elcra- ywyvjv, Iv , av la')(yp6Tepo<i iiriXd^TjraL fiov rov
ifiaTLOv, fir) avpu)fj,at, ; Iva, dv /Lte Se«a ixepicnrdaavT€<i
et? to Sea/McoTTjpcov e/x^dXcoaov, fir} 24 ifi^XrjdS) ; dXXo ovv ovSev e/Mudov ; e^adov, tva
irdv TO yivofievov Ihw on, av dirpoaiperov ^,
26 ovSev iajt 7rpo<t ifie.—rrpo'; tovto ovv ovk
ax^eXrjrraL ; tv ovv iv aXXcp ^r}Tei<i rrjv ax^eXeiav
26 r} iv o5 efiade'i ; —Kadrjii€vo<i Xoiirov iv ttj (fevXaKfj
\e7&) " ovTO<i 6 Tavra Kpavyd^cov oine rov
arj/jLatvofievov uKOvei ovre ra> Xeyopevo) TrapaKoXovdel
ovre oA-&)9 /j,ejj,eXi]Kev avT& elhevai
irepX tSjv (fiiXocrocpfov ri Xeyovaiv rj ri iroLOvaLV.
27 a^e? avrov. ' " dXX! e^eXOe irdXiv diro t^<? <f>vXaKr]<;" el /j,T}Keri ')(^peiav e%>;T6 fiov iv ttj
(f)vXaKf}, i^ep^o/jiai' av irdXiv cr^T^re, elae- 28 Xeva-ofiat. H'^XP'' "^^^^^ » H'^XP'-'* ^^ °^ X0709
aiprj avvelvai fie tu> acofiarla)' orav Be firj aipfj,
29 Xd/3er€ avro Kal vyiaivere. fiovov fir) dXoyiaTd)^,
fiovov firj fiaXaxo)^, firj ix rrjf; Tv^ovarfi irpo-
^ Epictetus seems to stop and address himself somewhat
abruptly, but the connection of this and the next sentence is not entirely clear. SchweighSuser thought that they were
addressed to some one cf his pupils.
192
BOOK I. XXIX. 21-29
high price ; for a lamp he became a thief, for a lamp he became faithless, for a lamp he became
beast-like. This seemed to him to be profitable ! Very well ; but now someone has taken hold of
me by my cloak and pulls me into the market-place,
and then others shout at me, " Philosopher, what
good have your judgements done you ? See, you
are being dragged off to prison ; see, you are going
to have your head cut off." And what kind of
Introduction to Philosophy could I have studied, which
would prevent me from being dragged off, if a man who
is stronger than I am should take hold of my cloak .'' Or would prevent me from being thrown into the
prison, if ten men should hustle me and throw
me unto it.^ Have I, then, learned nothing else?
I have learned to see that everything which happens,
if it be outside the realm of my moral purpose, is nothing to me.—Have you, then, derived no benefit
from this principle for the present case ? ^ ^Vhy,
then, do you seek your benefit in something other
than that in which you have learned that it is?
—
Well, as I sit in the prison I say, "The fellow who
shouts this at me neither understands what is meant,
nor follows what is said, nor has he taken any pains
at all to know what philosophers say, or what they
do. Don't mind him." " But come out ofthe prison
again." If you have no further need of me in the
prison, I shall come out ; if you ever need me there
again, I shall go back in. For how long? For so long as reason chooses that I remain with my paltry
body ; but wlicn reason does not so choose, take it and good health to you I Only let me not give up
my life irrationally, only let me not give up my life faintheartedly, or from some casual pretext. For
193
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
^ao-6ft)9. TToXiv jap 6 ^eo? ov ^ovXerai' %/)etaf
70^ e'X^ei Koafiov toiovtov, rSiv iirl <yr)<i ava-
(TTp€(})Ofi€vcov TOiovTtov. CUP Bc (Tr)fjLr]vr) TO avaK\y]TiKov
&)? TO) 'StCOKpdrei, TTeiOeadai Bel tw
arjfxaivovTi a)? arpaTTjyw.
30 Tt ovv ; Xeyeiv Bet ravra irpo^ roixj ttoXXou? ; 31 —"Iva Ti ; ov yap apxei to avTOV TreiOeadai ; Tot? yap TraiBcoi^, otov TrpoaeXOovTa KpoTjj Kal
\eyrj " arjixepov 'S.aTopvdXia dyadd," Xeyofiev " ovK ecTLV dyadd TavTa" ; ovBap,S)<i' dXXd Kal
32 avTol eTTiKpoTovpev. Kal av tolvvv, OTav fiCTa-
•neiaai Tiva firj Bvvt], yiyvwaKe oti ttuiBiov eo"T4 Kal iiriKpoTei avTa>' dv Be p,r} tovto 6eXr]<i,^
aicoTra Xonrov.
33 TovTtov Bel fjL€fivr]aOai Kal KXrjOevTa eh Tiva
ToiavTrjv TrepiaTaaiv elBevai, oti €X't]Xv6ev 6 34 Kaipo'i Tov diroBel^at, el TreTraiBevfieda. veo% yap dTTO <TXoXi]<; d-moov eh Trepia-Taaiv Ofj,ot6<: e<TTi Tw p-efieXeTTjKOTi crvXXoyia/j,ov^ dvaXveiv, Kav
Tt9 evXvTOv^ avTw irpoTeivrj, Xeyec " fidXXov p,oi
TreirXeyfievov Kopi^oi<i irpoTeivaTe, Xva yvfivaa65>y
Kal ol ddXrjTal Toh Kovc^ioi^ veavicrKot,^ Bvcr- 35 apecTTOVcnv " ov ^aaTd^et, p,e, (^rjcriv. " OUT09
eaTiv €V(f)vi]^ veo<i." ov' dX^a Ka\eaavT0<; tov
Kaipov KXdeiv Bel Kal Xeyetv " r^OeXov ert fiavddvecv." Tiva ; el ravra ovk ep-ade^ aJcrr ^
* Wolf after Schegk : OiXin S. * Reiske : tiXoyov S.
* Meibom : ovx Sxrr' S.
* Equivalent to our greeting, "Merry Christmas!" In what follows it would appear that the clapping of hands
upon this occasion was a kind of salutation, somewhat like the kiss at Easter among Greek Orthodox Christians. 194
BOOK I. XXIX. 29-35
again, God does not so desire ; for He has need of
such a universe, and of such men who go to and
fro upon earth. But if He gives the signal to
retreat, as He did to Socrates, I must obey Him
who gives the signal, as I would a general.
What then ? Must I say these things to the
multitude? For what purpose ? Is it not sufficient for a man himself to believe them ? For example,
when the children come up to us and clap their
hands and say, "To-day is the good Saturnalia," ^ do we say to them, "All this is not good"? Not
at all ; but we too clap our hands to them. And
do you too, therefore, when you are unable to make
a man change his opinion, realize that he is a child
and clap your hands to him ; but if you do not want
to do this, you have merely to hold your peace.
All this a man ought to remember, and when he
is summoned to meet some such difficulty, he ought
to know that the time has come to show whether
we are educated. For a young man leaving school
and facing a difficulty is like one who has practised
the analysis of syllogisms, and if someone propounds
him one that is easy to solve, he says, "Nay, rather
propound me one that is cunningly involved, so that
I may get exercise from it." Also the athletes are displeased with the youths of light weight : " He
cannot lift me," says one. " Yonder is a sturdy young
man." Oh no ; but when the crisis calls,^ he has to weep and say, " I wanted to keep on learning."
Learning what? If you do not learn these things
so as to be able to manifest them in action, what did
* That is, when, instead of an exercise for practice, he
has to meet an actual contestant, or a practical difficulty
in life. J95
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
36 6p7ft) Bei^ac, Trpo^ ri ai/rcL efuiOe^ ; ija> riva
olfiai tS>v Kadijfxevcov ivravda oihiveiv ainov
e<f> eavTOu kuI Xeyeiv " e/jLol vvv irepicnaaiv fir) €p')(^e(j6at TGiavrriv, oiroia rovrw iXrjXvOev ; efie vvv KaTarpi^rjvai KaOrj/xevov ev ycovLO, hvvdfievov
(rTe(f)av(i)6i]vai OXv/juTrta ; ttotc rt? e/ioi KarayyeXel
toiovtov dycova ; " ovto}<; e^^iv eSei Trdvra^;
37 u/ia?. dX}C iv fiev TOt<; Katcrapo? /xovop^axoif
elcTL Tiv€<: 01 dyavuKTOvvre^ on ov8ei<i avTov^
trpodyei ovhe i^evyvvei Kal 6V')(0vraL toj 6e(i> koX
TrpocrepxovTat to?? €7riTp67roi<; Beofievot, fiovofia')(riaai,
e^ v/xcov 8 ovBel<i <f>avijcreTat toiovtov ; 38 TjdeXop TrXevcrai eir avro tovto kol iheiv, ri fiov 39 TToiet 6 ddXr]j7]<;, ttw? fieXera rrfv virodeaiv. " ov
^e'Xfi)," (f)rjaiv, " roiavTTjv.' eVt aol ydp iari
XajBelv r)v OeXei<i v-noOecnv ; 8e8orai aoi ado/xa
TOIOVTOV, yovei'i toiovtoi, d8eX(f}ol toiovtoi, 7raTpl<i
TOtavTr], Ta^i'; ev avTrj TOiavTi]- elrd jxol Xeyei<i
iXdoiv " dXka^ov fx,oi Trjv vTroOeatv." elra ovk
€)(^ei<; d(^opfia<; irpd'i to ')(p>]cracrOai rot? ^ 8odeiaiv ; 40 OOP eari irpoTelvai, e/xov fxeXeTijaai KaX(ii)<i. ov
dXXd " p.r} ToiovTO fioc irpo^dXri^ rpoTTiKov, dXXa
TOIOVTOV fit) TOLavrrjv eir eveyKrjf; ttjv eTTicpopdv,
41 aXXa TocavTrjv." earai '^(^povo'i ra^a, ev co ol Tpaya>8o\ olijaovrai (uvtovs elvat irpoawnela koi
ep,^d8a<i Kal to avpfxa. dvdpcoTre, tuvtu vXrjv 42 e%fct9 Kal uirodecnv. (\)dey^at ti, iva €l8a)/j.ev
TTOTepov Tpaya)86^ el rj yeXcoTOTroio^;- KOiva ydp
' Supplied by Schenkl.
' Objecting, that is, to a hypothetical syllogism of a particular
kind and proposing another, more to his own liking.
196
BOOK I. XXIX. 35-42
you learn them for ? I fancy that someone among
these who are sitting here is in travail within his own soul and is saying, "Alas, that such a difficulty
does not come to me now as that which has come
to this fellow ! Alas, that now I must be worn
out sitting in a corner, when I might be crowned
at Olympia ! When will someone bring me word
of such a contest?" You ought all to be thus
minded. But among the gladiators of Caesar there
are some who complain because no one brings them
out, or matches them with an antagonist, and they
pray God and go to their managers, begging to fight
in single combat; and yet will no one of you display a like spirit ? I wanted to sail to Rome for this very
pur|X)se and to see what my athlete is doing, what
practice he is following in his task. " I do not
want," says he, "this kind of a task." What, is it in your power to take any task you want } You
have been given such a body, such parents, such
brothers, such a country, such a position in it ; and
then do you come to me and say, " Change the task
for me '' t What, do you not jx)ssess resources to enable you to utilize that which has been given ? You
ought to say, " It is yours to set the task, mine to
practise it well." No, but you do say, " Do not propose
to me such-and-such a hypothetical syllogism, but
rather such-and-such a one ; ^ do not urge upon me
such-and-such a conclusion, but rather such-and-such
a one." A time will soon come when the tragic
actors will think that their masks and buskins and
the long robe are themselves. Man, all these things
you have as a subject-matter and a task. Say something,
so that we may know whether you are a
tragic actor or a buffoon ; for both of these have
197
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
43 k')(pv(n ra aWa dfi(f)OTepoi. Sta tovto av a<^e\rj Tt? avTOv Kui ra<i €/ji,^d8a<; kuI to irpoaaiTrelov
Kat iv elSoiXai amov Trpoaydyrj, dTfuikero 6 rpaymBof rj fiivei ; av (fxovrjv e')(rj, privet. 44 Kal ivOdSe. " Xd^e i)yepovLav.^* Xap^dvo)
Kal Xa^oiv BeiKvveo, ttco? avdpoiTTO^ dva<TTp€(f)eTai
46 '7r€7rai8evp,€vo^. " $€<; rrjv irXaTva-qp.ov Koi dvaXa/3(ov
puKT} irpoaeXde iv TrpoaooTra) TOiouTO)."
Tfc ovv ; ov BeSorai pot kuXtjv <f>MVT)v elaeveyKelv ; 46 " Troi<i ovv dva^aivef; vvv ;" a>9 p,dpTV<; vtto tov
47 6€ov k€kX')]p£vo<;. " ep-)(ov av Kal p^aprvprjaov
por av yap d^to^ el '7Tpoa-)(d?jvai p,dpTv<; vir epov. pi] Tt Tcov iKT6<i T7/? 7rpoaipea€(o<; dyaOov
iaTiv rj KaKov ;
pLtj rcva ^XdrrTco ; prj ti ctt' dXXm TTjv uK^eXeiav erroirjaa rrjv eKaarov rj eir' 48 avTa> ; " Tcva p,apTvp[av StS&j? t& dew ; " iv
8eivoi<; elpi, Kvpie, Kal SuaTV)(Mi ovBel^ p,ov iiri- aTpecfjerai, ovSei^ pot SlBcoaiv ovBev, 7rdvTe<; 49 yfreyovaiv, KaKoXoyovaiv.^' ravra peXX€t<i paprvpelv
KaX KaTaia)(^vveiv ttjv KXrjaiv fiv xeKXtjKeVf
OTi ae eTLprjaev Tavrrjv rrjv Tiprjv Kal d^iov
r^yrjaajo irpoaayayelv eh paprvplav rrjXiKavTrjv ; 60 'AW' direcfiTJvaTO 6 e^oov ttjv i^ovaiav " Kpivco ae dae^Tj Kal dvoaiov elvai." tc aoi yeyovev ; 51 " cKpiOrfv dae/3v<; Kal dvoaiov elvac." dXXo ov- 8ev ; " ovSev" el Se irepl avvrjppevov rti/o? eVt- KeKpLKei Kal ihehcoKei d7r6<paaiv " to el 'qpepa
1 The toga with a broad stripe of red which was worn
by men of senatorial rank. 198
BOOK I. XXIX. 42-51
everything but their lines in common. Therefore, if one should take away from him both his buskins and
hts mask, and bring him on the stage as a mere
shade of an actor, is the tragic actor lost, or does
he abide.'' If he has a voice, he abides.
And so it is in actual life. "Take a governorship."
I take it and having done so I show how
an educated man comports himself. " Lay aside
the laticlave,^ and having put on rags come for- ward in a character to correspond." What then?
Has it not been given me to display a fine voice. " In what role, then, do you mount the stage now ? " As a witness summoned by God. God says, " Go
you and bear witness for Me; for you are worthy
to be produced by me as a witness. Is any of those
things which lie outside the range of the moral
purpose either good or evil ? Do I injure any man?
Have I put each man's advantage under the control
of any but himself?" What kind of witness do
you bear for God ? " I am in sore straits, O Lord,
and in misfortune ; no one regards me, no one gives
me anything, all blame me and speak ill of me.''
Is this the witness that you are going to bear, and
is this the way in which you are going to disgrace the
summons which He gave you, in that He bestowed
this honour upon you and deemed you worthy to be
brought forward in order to bear testimony so important
? But the one who has authority over you declares, " I pronounce you impious and profane." What has
happened to you ? "1 have been pronounced impious
and profane." Nothing else? "Nothing." But
if he had passed judgement upon some hypothetical
syllogism and had made a declaration, " I judge
199
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
eanv, (^w? icntv Kpivco \Jr€vBo<; elvai," ti eyeyovei
tS> crvvrjfi/iiivai ; rl<i ivQdhe Kpiverai, ri^ KaraKeKptTai
; ro avvrj^ifievov rj 6 i^a-naT7]d6\<i irepl 52 avTov ; ovto<; ovv rt? irore 6 e^cov i^oualav tov
UTTOcfiijvaaOaL ri irepX crov ; oiSeu ti ecrri to
€V(T€^€<; rj TO a(Te/3€<; ; fi€/jLe\eTTjK€V avTO ; /xe/ia- 63 dtjKCv ; TTOv ; irapa Tivi ; elra fiovaiKb<i fiev ovk
iTrta-Tp€(f>€Tai. avTov aTrocliaivofievov irepX Trj<;
vriTTj^i oTi iaTiv viraTT] ovhe yecofieTpiKof;, av
iTTlKplvT) Ta<; CLTTO KeVTpOV TTyOO? TOU KVKKoV
54 irpoairnTTovaa'i /jlt) elvai ttra^' 6 8e Tal<; ak'qOetat^
TreTraiSev/xePO^ avBpooTTOv airaiSevTov emaTpa(f)i](TeTat
lirtKpiuovTo^ tl irepl oaiov koX
avoaiov koX uBlkov koI hiKaiov
;
'n TToXkr]^ dBiKoa^ Ta)v TreTraiBevfiivcov. tuvtu
55 ovv €/j,ad€<; evTavOa ; ov de\€L<i to, fiev \oydpia
TO. Trepl TovTcov dXkoi<; dcfyelvai, dTa\acTrQ)poi<;
dvdpa>TTapiot<i, IV ev ycovia Kade^o/uLCPOi puiaddpia
Xa/jL^dvcocTiv rj yoyyv^waiv, oti ouBel<; avToi<i irape-
)(ei ovBev, av Be 'X^pijadai irapeXOoov ol<i e/xade^i
;
56 ov yap Xoydpid iaTi to. XelirovTa vvv, dXka ye/xei
TO, /St^Xi'a Twv liTWLKOiv Xoyaploiv. tl ovv to
XeiTTOV eaTiv ; 6 ')(^pr}a6p^vo<;, 6 epyo) /xapTvptja-cov 67 T0t9 X6yoi<;. tovto fioi to TTpoaooirov dvdXa^e,
'iva /xr}KeTi 7raXatot<; ev tjj <j')(^oXfi TrapaBetyp-aai
)(pd>/x€da, dXXd 'i'^wixev tl kol Kaff' rjp.d<i Trapd-
* The lowest string had, however, the highest note in pitch, and vice versa.
BOOK I. XXIX. 51-57
the statement, ' If it is day, there is light," to be
false," what has happened to the hypothetical
syllogism? Who is being judged in this case, who
has been condemned ? The hypothetical syllogism, or the man who has been deceived in his judgement
about it ? Who in the world, then, is this man who
has authority to make any declaration about you ? Does he know what piety or impiety is ? Has he
pondered the matter? Has he learned it? Where?
Under whose instruction ? And yet a musician pays no attention to him, if he declares that the lowest
string is the highest,^ nor does a geometrician, if the
man decides that the lines extending from the
centre to the circumference of a circle are not
equal ; but shall the truly educated man pay
attention to an uninstructed person when he passes
judgement on what is holy and unholy, and on what is just and unjust?
How great is the injustice committed by the
educated in so doing ! Is this, then, what you
have learned here ? Will you not leave to others,
mannikins incapable of taking pains, the petty
quibbles about these things, so that they may sit in a corner and gather in their petty fees, or grumble
because nobody gives them anything, and will you
not yourself come forward and make use of what
you have learned ? For what is lacking now is not quibbles ; nay, the books of the Stoics are full of quibbles. What, then, is the thing lacking
now ? The man to make use of them, the man
to bear witness to the arguments by his acts. This is the character I would have you assume, that
we may no longer use old examples in the school,
but may have some example from our own time
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
58 Betyfia. ravra ovv rcvo<; icnl Oeoopeiv ; rov
a-xo\d^ovTO<i. ecTTt yap (j)i\ode(op6v ti ^wov 6 59 avdpwTTO^. a\X' al(r)(^p6v ecrri decopelv ravra
ovrQ)<; cof oi hpairerai' afOC aTT€picnrd(Tr(o<i
KaOrjaOai Kal uKoveiv vvv fiev rpaywSov vvv he
KidapwBov, ov^ 0)9 eKeivoi rroLovcnv. apa p,kv
iirecTTrj Kal cTr^veaev rov rpaymSov, apa 8e Trepie^Xeyfraro'
elra av rt<; ^6ey^rjrai Kvpiov, €vdv<; 60 aeao^rjvrai, rapdaaovrai. alcr-x^pov ecrriv our(i)<i
Kal rovs (l}i\ocr6(f)Ov<i decopelv ra epya r?}? (f>vae(o<;. re yap iari Kvpco<; ; avdp(airo<i dvdpcoTrov Kvpt,o<i
ovK eariv, dWd 6dvaro<; Kal i^w-q Kal tjBovt) kuI
61 TToro?. eirel %«i>/3i9 rovroiv dyayk poi rov Kaicrapa
Kal oyjret ttw? evcrradco. orav Be perd
rovrcov eXdrj jBpovroiV Kal darpdrrrrcov, iycb Be ravra <po^o)pai, ri dXXo rj erreyvwKa rov Kvptov
62 0)9 BpaTverq^ ; p-eXpt ^' dv ov riva dvo')(r)v diro
rovrtav e^&), o)9 Bpairerrj'; e^lcrrarai dedrpo)
ovr(o<; Kayoo- Xovopai, ttlvco, aBco, vdvra Be perd
63 i^ojBov Kal raXaiTTay pla<;. eav 6' epavrov diroXvao)
r(ov Becnrorwv, rovr ecrriv fKecvoov, Bi, d
01 Bearrorai elcrl cfyo^epol, rrolov en irpdypa e^a),
TTolov ere Kvpiov ; 64 Ti ovv ; Krjpvaaetv Bel ravra rrpb^ rrdvra^ ; —
Ou, dXXd roU IBicorai^ (TvpTrepKpepeadai Kal
Xeyeiv " ovro<i o avrui dyaOov oterai rovro Kapol
65 (rvp,f3ovXev€i' avyyLyvdxTKw avrCo.^ Kal ydp
* The runaway slave, always apprehensive that his master may suddenly' appear, is nervous and distraught, giving only
half his mind to the spectacle before him.
* One who sang to his own accompaniment upon the
cithara or harp.
BOOK I. XXIX. 57-65
also. Whose part is it, then, to contemplate these
matters? The part of him who devotes himself
to learning ; for man is a kind of animal that
loves contemplation. But it is disgraceful to con- template these things like runaway slaves ; ^ nay, sit rather free from distractions and listen, now to
tragic actor and now to the citharoede,' and not
as those runaways do. For at the very moment
when one of them is paying attention and praising
the tragic actor, he takes a glance around, and then
if someone mentions the word "master," they are
instantly all in a flutter and upset. It is disgraceful
for men who are philosophers to contemplate the
works of nature in this spirit. For what is a " master " ? One man is not master of another man,
but death and life and pleasure and hardship are his masters. So bring Caesar to me, if he be n-ithout these things, and you shall see how steadfast I am. But when he comes rvith them, thundering and lightening,
and I am afraid of them, what else have I done
but recognized my master, like the runaway slave ? But so long as I have, as it were, only a respite
from these threats, I too am acting like a runaway
slave who is a spectator in a theatre ; I bathe, I drink, I sing, but I do it all in fear and misery.
But if I emancipate myself from my masters, that is, from those things which render masters terrifying,
what further trouble do I have, what master an}'
more?
What then? Must I proclaim this to all men?
No, but I must treat with consideration those who
are not philosophers by profession, and say, " Tills man advises for me that which he thinks good in
his own case ; therefore I excuse him." For Socrates
203
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
2,coKpdrT]<; (TvveyiyvayaKev t& iirl t^? (f>vXaKr}<i
kXciovti, ore efieWev iriveiv to (pdpfiaKov, kol
66 Xiyei " (u? yevval,a)<; r/fid^; aTroSeSaKpuKev." fitj Ti ovv eKeivm Xeyet on " 8id rovro Td<; yvvaiKa^
mreXvcra/iiev ; dWa rol<i yvo)pt/jLOi<;, toI^: 8uvafievoi^
avrd aKovaai' eKeivcp 8e crv/j,Tr€pi(f)€peTai
0)9 iraiScco.
\'. Tt Set Trpoxeipov e)(etv iv rat?
irepicndaeaLv ;
1 "Oral/ elabj]^ irpo^ rcva roiv viT€pe')(^ovTaiv,
fiifMVJjcro OTt KOL dWo^ dvwdev ^Xeirei rd yiyvofjLeva
Kal oti eKelvw ae Bel /xdWov dpeaKeiv rj 2 TOVTO). eKelvo'i ovv aov TruvOdveTat " (f^vyrjp koI
<f)vXaKT)v Kal BecTfid Kal Odvarov Kal dho^lav tl 3 eXeye'i iv rfj cr^oXfj ; " " eyoo d8id(f)opa." " vvv ovv TLva avrd Xeyei^ ; fn'] ti eKslva ijXXdyr} ;"
ov. (TV OVV rjWayrj'i ; ou. Xeye ovv TLva eaTlv d8id(f)opa." " Ta aTrpoalpeTa" ^ " Xeye
Kal Ta e^?}?." " dirpoalpera ovSev Trpo? e'/xe." 4 " Xeye Kal rd dyaOd riva vpuv eBoKei ;
' " irpoaipeai^
oXa 8el Kal y^prjais (pavraaiMV, " TeXo<i
5 8e Tt ; " " TO crot aKoXovdelv." " ravra Kal vvv
Xeyei<; ;
' " TauTa Kal vvv Xe'yw. airidi Xonrov
e(T<o OappMV Kal /xepivr}p,evo<i tovtwv Kal oyjrec
' TO airpoaipeTa supplied by Upton from his "codex."
1 Slightly modified from Plato, Phaedo, 116d.
* Slightly modified from Plato, Phaedo, 1I7d. 204
BOOK I. XXIX. 65-xxx. 5 excused the jailor who wept for him when he
was about to drink the poison, and said, " How
generously he has wept for us ! "^ Does he, then,
say to the jailor, " This is why we sent the women
away " ? ^ Xo, but he makes this latter remark to
his intimate friends, to those who were fit to hear
it ; but the jailor he treats with consideration like a child.
CHAPTER XXX
tVhat aid ought we to have readt/ at hand in difficuUiex ? When you come into the presence of some prominent
man, remember that Another' looks from
above on what is taking place, and that you must
please Him rather than this man. He, then, who
is above asks of you, " In your school what did you
call exile and imprisonment and bonds and death and
disrt- pute r " " I called them ' things indifferent.' " " Wliat, then, do you call them now ? Have
they changed at all?" "No." "Have you, then,
changed?" "No." "Tell me, then, what things
are 'indifferent.' " " Those that are independent of
the moral purpose." "Tell me also what follows." " Things independent of the moral puqiose are nothing to me." " Tell me also what you thought were ' the good things.' " " A projier moral purpose
and a proper use of external impressions." "And
what was the 'end'?" "To follow Thee." "Do
you say all that even now?" "I say the same
things even now." Then enter in, full of confidence
and mindful of all this, and you shall see
• That is, God. Compare note on I. 25, 13. 205
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Tt iari veo<i fi€/jL€\€Tr]Ka><i a Bet iv av6p(OTroi<i
6 afxeXerrjTOt^;. iyo) fikv vrj tov<; deov^; (f>ai>Td^o/j,ai
OTi Treia-r} to toiovtov " ri ovTa}<; ^eyaXa Koi
7 iroWa TrapaaKeva^o/xeOa Trpo? to firjBev ; tovto
T)v -q e^ovcrta ; tovto to, irpoOvpa, ol koitcovItui,
01 eVt Tr7<? fxa')(^aipa<i ; tovtwv eveKa TOv<i ttoWoix:
Xojovi ijKOvov; TavTa ovSev rjv, iyo) S" ax: f^eydXa
Trapea-Keva^ofiTjv.^*
2o6
BOOK I. XXX. 5-7
what it means to be a young man who has studied
what he ought, when he is in the presence of men
who have not studied. As for me, by the gods, I fancy that you will feel somewhat like this : " Why
do we make such great and elaborate preparations
to meet what amounts to nothing? Was this what
authority amounted to ? Was this what the vesti- bule, the chamberlains, the armed guards amounted
to ? Was it for all this that I listened to those long
discourses ? Why, all this never amounted to anything,
but I was preparing for it as though it were
something great."
207
i
BOOK II
&
KE*AAAIA TOY B BIBAIOT
a . 'Otj ov fiixfTUi rh Oappelv ry evKa^ucrOaL.
P'. Tlepl arapa^ias.
y . Xlphi Tovs (Tvviardvrai rtvas to7s (f)t\oa6<pots. 5 . npbs Thv eVl fioixfi} TOTe KaTfiK-q/j./j.ffov.
e . nis ffvyundpxfi ix€ya\o<ppoavvn (col iTrtfj.f\(iaf
S" . Tlepl aSiacpopias.
('• Ho) J ixavTtvTfOV ; V Tis ovaia rov ayaOov ; 0'. "Oti olt Svidfifpoi Tr]v ipBpiuTou inayyf\iav vXripoiffat r^v
(piKocropov irpo<rKan^a.vofj.ev.
I . riajj awh Twv ovofxaToiv ra KadifKOvra icTTiv tvpiaKftv ; ta'. Tis a.jxh <^'A.i(TO(^/aj ; ip . Tlip\ Toil Sia\(y€(Tdai.
ty. Ufpl Toil aywuiav.
i8 . Uphs Na'troira.
tf riphs TOVS (TK\r] ws Tivoiv wv eKpLvav ifif^fvovTas.
4j- . Oti oil /LKKerw/LLtv \pr\ff8ai. tois irepl ayaOwv koI KaKoiv
hSyfiaaiv.
*C . riaJj ((papfjioaTfov Toj irp}\T}yf/eis to7s iiri fxipovs
;
17] . nij ay-MviffTtov Trphs tcls (pavra^rlas.
tO . npbs TOVS /if xp' X^yov ^ /x6vo ' aiiaKanPivoyTas to Tftj*- <pi\o<T6(pcov. K . Tlphs 'EiriKovpflovs koI 'AKa^rifnaiKovs. Ka . Vlfpl avofioKoylas.
K^'. Tlep\ <pi\ias. Ky . Tlep) TTjs Tov \fyeiv Bwdfiews.
Kh n OS Ttva Twv O'JK Ti^iWfj.ivwv itr' avTov,
Kt'. ni. uvay aia ra. XoyiKa.
Kf'. Tl rh tSiop TOV ^ a.fj.apT'ljiJ.aTOS.
^ Upton : K'yuy S,
' Supplied by Schweighauaer.
2IO
BOOK II
CJiapUrs of the Seamd Book
L That confidence does not conflict with caation.
11. On tranqnillity.
III. To those who recommend persons to the philosophers. IV. To the man who had once been caught in adultery. V. How are magnanimity and carefulness compatible ? VI. Of indifference in things. VII. How should one employ divination? VIII. What is the true nature of the good 7 IX. That although we are unable to fulfil the profession
of a man we adopt that of a philosopher.
X. How from the designation that he bears is it possible to discover a man's duties 7 XL What is the beginning of philosophy 7 XII. Upon the art of argumentation. Xm. Of anxietv. XIV. To Naso.
"
XV. To those who cling obstinately to the judgements
which they have once formed.
XVI. That we do not practise the application of our judgements about things good and e\^l. XVII. How ought we adjust our preconceptions to in- dividual instances? XVIII. How must we struggle against our external impressions
7 XIX. To those who take up the teachings of the philosophers
only to talk about them 7 XX. Against Epicureans and Academics.
XXI. Of inconsistency.
XXII. Of friendship.
XXIIL Of the faculty of expression.
XXIV. To one of those whom he did not deem worthy.
XXV. How is logic necessary 7 XXVX What is the distinctive characteristic of error ?
a! . "Oil OX) fjbdx€Tai to dappelv tu> evXa/Seladai.
1 UapdSo^ov /xev tu')(ov ^aiverai riaiv ro d^iovfievov
VTTO Tcbv (^i\.0(76<^(t}v, 6fio)'i 8e <TKeyfr(Ofie6a
KUTa hvvafiiv, el d\r)Oe<i icni to helv^ dfia fiev euXa2
^cii)<i dfia Se OappouvTQ)^ TrdvTaTroielv. euavriovydp
TTO)? Sotcei rat dappa\ea> to ev\aj3e<;, to, 6' evavria
3 ovBa/xwf; (Tvvv7rdp)(^€i. to Be t^aivop-evov ttoWoc^
ev tS) totto) irapdho^ov Soxei p,oi toiovtov tivo<;
e;^6o-^af el fxei' yap 7rp6<; TavTa rj^iovfiev '^(^pfjadai
TTJ T evXa^eia KaX tw ddpaei, BiKaia)^ dv r]p,d<; 4 rjTioiVTO (if TO, davvaKTa (TvvdyovTa<;. vvv he
Tt Seivov e%et to Xeyopevov ; el yap vyii] tuvt
€<TTi TO, TToWdKi^ p,ev elpTjpeva, TroWdxi^; S' diToheheiypAva, on r) ovaia tov dyaOov ecTTiv ev
)(p7]aei (f)avTaaio)v kuI tov KaKOv aocravTco^, to,
5' dirpoalpeTa out€ ttjv tov KaKOv Se^^Tai tpvaiv
5 ovTe TTJV TOV dyadov, tL irapdho^ov d^LOvcnv ol
(f)i\6ao(f)oc, el XeyovcLv " ottov p-kv to, dirpoaipeTa,
eKeiTo Odp(TO<i eaTco cot, oirou he Ta irpoatpeTiKu,
6 eKel rj evXd^eia "
; el yap ev kukt] Trpoaipecrei to
1 rhSe:v Elter: rJSe. '/^ S. 312
CHAPTER I That confidence does not conflict with caution
Perhaps the following contention of the philosophers
appears paradoxical to some, but nevertheless
let us to the best of our ability consider whether it is true that " we ought to do everything both cautiously
and confidently at the same time." For caution seems to be in a way contrary to confidence, and
contraries are by no means consistent. But that
which appears to many to be paradoxical in the
matter under discussion seems to me to involve
something of this sort : If we demanded that a man
should employ both caution and confidence in regard
to the same things, then we would be justly charged
with uniting qualities that are not to be united.
But, as a matter of fact, what is there strange about
the saying.^ For if the statements which have often
been made and often proved are sound, namely that
"the nature of the good as well as of the evil lies in a use of the impressions of the senses, but the things
which lie outside the province of the moral purpose
admit neither the nature of the evil, nor the nature
of the good "
; what is there paradoxical about the
contention of the philosophers, if they say, '• Where
the things that lie outside the province of the moral
purpose are involved, there show confidence, but
where the things that lie within the province of the
moral purpose are involved, there show caution " .'' For if the evil lies in an evil exercise of the moral
213
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
KaKov, Trpo^ fMOi a ravTa j^pfjcrOat. a^iov evXa^elw
el Be ra airpoaipeTa Ka\ fxr) e'^' rj/xiv ovSev tt/jo? 7 r}fjLd<i, 7rpo9 ravTa tm Bdpaei, ')(pi]aT€ou. Kal
ovTco^ dfia p.ev evKa^el<i dpa hk OappaXeoi. eaoixeOa
KoX vrj Ala Sid Tr)v euXd^eiav OappaXeoi. Scd yap
TO evXa^etaOai rd ourux; Kaxd avfi^ijaeTat
dappetv r^filv 7rp6^ rd p,r] ovtq)^ e^orra.
8 AoiTTOP Tjfiel'i to twv eXd(f)Q}v jrda^^op.ev OTe
(f)oj3ouvTai Ka\ (^evyovatv at eXa(f)Oi Ta Trre/Ja, ttoD TpeTTovraL Kal Trpof Ttva dva^oopovaiv co? dcr^aXrj ; -rrpo^ Ta SiKTva' koI ovrco^i diroXXwraL ivaX9
Xd^acrai to. (po^epd Kal Ta dappaXea- ovrwi
Koi rj/jLet<i TTOv -^pcofieOa tS) ^o/Sco; 7rpo9 Ta dirpoaipeTa.
iv Tiaiv irdXiv 6appovvTe<; dvaaTpecpofMeSa
0)9 ovSevo-i 0VT09 Seivov ; ev toI^ 7rpoaip€TiKol<;.
10 e^aTrarrjOrjvac rj Trpoireaeiv t) dvaicr'X^vvTov Tt
iroiTJcrai rj p,eT eTTiOvfiia^ aia')(^pd<; opexdrjvai
Tivo<; ovSev Bia(f)epei r)p,iv, dv [xovov ev rot? dirpoai,-
peTOi<i^ €V(TT0X(*>P'€V. OTTOV 8e ddvaT0<; rj (f)vyr) rj TTovo^ rj dSo^ia, €K€i to dva^wpi^TLKOv, enel to
11 (T€cro0r]p,evov. Toiyapovv uxnrep elKO<; tov<;
irepl rd fxeyiara BiajxapTavovTa^i to p,ev (f)vaei OappaXeov
Opaav KaTa<TK6ud^o/x€v, dTrovevor}p,evov,
Irapov, dvai(T)(yvTov, to S' evXa^e<; ^vcrei Kal
^ Upton from his " codex": anpoaiperiKols S.
* The beaters used to frighten deer into the nets by
stretching a cord, with brightly coloured feathers on it, across the safe openings in the wood. Compare Vergil, Georgics, III. 372 ; cf. Aen., XII. 750., " (In Scythia) men drive them (stags) not (into nets, as they do here) with the terrors of the crimson feather." 214
BOOK II. I. 6-1
1
purpose, it is only in regard to matters of this kind
that it is right to employ caution ; but if the things
which lie outside the province of the moral purpose
and are not under our control are nothing to us, we
ought to employ confidence in regard to them. And
so we shall be at one and the same time both
cautious and confident, yes, and, by Zeus, confident
because of our caution. For because we are cautious
about the things which are really evil, the result
will be that we shall have confidence in regard to the things which are not of that nature. However, we act like deer : when the hinds are frightened by the feathers ^ and run away from them,
where do they turn, and to what do they fly for refuge as a safe retreat r Why, to the nets ; and so they perish because they have confused the objects
of fear with the objects of confidence. So it is with us also ; where do we show fear .' About
the things which lie outside the province of the
moral purpose. Again, in what do we behave with
confidence as if there were no danger.'* In the
things which lie within the province of the moral
purpose. To be deceived, or to act impetuously, or
to do something shameless, or with base passion to desire something, makes no difference to us, if only
in the matters which lie outside the province of the
will we succeed in our aim. But where death, or
exile, or hardship, or ignominy faces us, there we show
the spirit of running away, there we show violent
agitation. Therefore, as might be expected of those
men who err in matters of the greatest concern, we
transform our natural confidence into boldness,
desperateness, recklessness, shamelessness, while our
natural caution and self-respect we transform into
215
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
cuSrjfiov SeiXov koI ruTreivov, (f)6^Q)v koI rapax^Mv
12 fiecrrov. av yap ti<; eKel fieraOfj to ev\a^e<;, oirov
Trpoaipeaif koX epya irpoaLpea-ew^, €vOv<; a/xa tw
deXeiv evKa^eladai koI e7r' uvtm Kei/jiivrjv e^ec
TTjv eKKXicriv av 8' ottov to, firj ec/)' rjfuv icnt, xal
atrpoaipera, 7rpo<i ra eV aWoi<i ovra ttjv €KK\iaiv
ey^oov avayKaio)^ <f)o0j]a€Tai,, aKararnaTrjcreL,
13 rapayOrjaeTai. ov yap ddvara rj irovo^i ^oQepov, aWa TO (poSeladai ttovov rj ddvarov. Sia
rovTo iiraivovfiev rov elirovTa on
ov KarOavelv yap Seivov, aXV al(TXP<^'i Oavelv.
14 ESet ovv 7rpo9 p,ev rov Odvarov to 6dpao<i
earpdi^Oai, irpo^ he rov (po^ov rov Oavdrov ttjv
evXdSeiav vvv he to ivavriov Trp6<; fxev tov Odva- rov rrjv cj^vytjv, 7rpo<i he ro irepl avrov hoy/xa rrjv
dveTnarpeyjrLav koI to a/ieXe? * Kal to dhia(f)opr]- 16 TiKov. Tavra S' o ^wKpdTrj^ Ka\o)<i ttolcov fiop/jLo\vK€ia eKdXei q><; yap to?? 7raihl,oi<; ra
TrpoacoTrela (paLverai heivd Kal (f)0^epa he diretpiav,
ToiovTov Tt Kal Tj/xel^ '7rd(T)(opev 7rpb<i to, irpdyfiara
St' ovhev dWo r) ojcnrep Kal to, iraihia '7rpb<; Ta?
16 fx,op/xo\vKtLa<;. tl ydp iart Traihiov; dyvoia. tI eaTi iraihiov ; dp.adia. errel ottov olhev, KaKelva
17 ovhev rjfiwv eXarrov ey^er 6(ivaT0<; tI ecniv
;
p,npfxo\vKeiov. arpeyjra^ avTO KaTafiade' Ihov,
^ Kronenberg : i,(pfiSfi S.
* From an unknown tragic poet (Naiick, Fragm. TragA'^esp.,
88); included also among the Monostichs of Menander, 504.
* Plato, Phatdo llfs,; compare Crito 46c. Epictetus seems 2l6
BOOK II. I. ii-i,
cowardice and abjectness, fiill of fears and perturbation^.
For if a man should transfer his caution to the sphere of the moral purpose and the deeds of
the moral purpose, then along with the desire to be cautious he will also at once have under his control the will to avoid ; whereas, if he should
transfer his caution to those matters which are not
under our control and lie outside the province of the
moral purpose, inasmuch as he is applying his will to avoid towards those things which are under the
control of others, he will necessarily be subject to
fear, instability, and perturbation. For it is not
death or hardship that is a fearful thing, but the fear
of hardship or death. That is why we praise the
man who said
Not death is dreadful, but a shameful death.
^
Our confidence ought, therefore, to be turned
toward death, and our caution toward the fear ot death ; whereas we do just the opposite—in the face
of death we turn to flight, but about the formation
of a judgement on death we show carelessness,
disregard, and unconcern. But Socrates did well to
call all such things " bugbears." ^ For just as masks
appear fearful and terrible to children because of
inexperience, in some such manner we also are
affected by events, and this for the same reason that
children are affected by bugbears. For what is a
child .^ Ignorance. What is a child.' Want of
instruction. For where a child has knowledge, he
is no worse than we are. What is death ? A
bugbear. Turn it about and learn what it is ; see,
to use uopfioXvKfioy and uopfioXvKtla in the unusual sense of a
terrifying form of mask.
VOL. I. I 217
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TTW? ov hcLKvet' TO (TcofiaTiov Set ')((i>piad rival tov
TTVeVfULTLOV, 6t)9 TTpOTepOV iK€)(Ct)pt(TTO, f) VVV T} vcTepov. Tt ovv ayavaKT€C<;, el vvv ; el yap fir) 18 vvv, xxnepov. Sia ti; iva rj irepioho'i dvvrjrai tov
KOCTfiov ')(^pelav yap e^^i tcov fxev evLarafjuevcov,
19 Tcov he fieWovTcov, twv S' r/i/vafievcov, irovo^ tl iaTiv ; /MoppoXvKeiov. aTpi^jrov avTo Kal xardfiaOe.
Tpa')(i(o<i KLvelrai to aapxihiov, elTa iroKiv
Xetoj?. dv (TOL firj XvcmeXfj, rj dvpa rjvotKTar
20 av XvaiTeXrj, <f)epe. Trpo? irdvTa yap rjvol^dai
hex TTjv dvpav, Kal TrpdypAX ovk e^o/xev.
21 Tt? ovv tovtcov tS>v hoypLaTCiv Kaptro'i ; ovnep
hel KaWicTTOV t' elvai zeal TrpeircoheaTaTOV rot?
TO) ovTt TraihevopievoL'i, uTapa^la d<f)ofiia eXev22
depia. ov yap Tot<; ttoXXois irepl tovtwv -rnaTevT€ov,
at Xeyovaiv povoi^ i^elvai iraiheveadai toI^; eXevdepoi<;, dXXd toi? (f)iXo(r6(poi^ p,dXXov, oi 23 XeyovcTi fxavov; Toy? 'n-aihev9evTa<i eXevdepov<i elvai. —Ilw? TOVTO ;—OvTdXi' VVV dXXo TL eaTiv
iXevdepia rj to e^elvat co? ^ovXopeOa hie^dyetv ; " ovhev." X€76Te hj'j fwi, w dvOpcoiroi, ^ovXeade
^rjv afxapTdvovTe^; " ov ^ovXop^Oa!^ ovhel<; 24 Toivvv dfiapTdv(ov eXevdepo^ eaTiv. ^ovXecde
^rjv (^o^ovpevoL, ^ovXecrde Xvirovpevoi, ^ovXeade
Tapacrao/xevoi; " ou^a/xw?." ovh€l<i dpa ovTe
» A favourite idea of the Stoics (Zeno in Diog. Laert. VII.
137; Marcus Aurelius V. 13 and 32; X. 7, 2; XL 2). Briefly expressed, it is a theory of " cyclical regeneration " (Marc. Aur. XI. 2), i.e., that all things repeat themselves
in periodic cycles. Cf. Norden, Oeburt des Kindts (1924), 31.
* " Freedom" in the days of the older Greek philosophers
connoted primarily the exercise of political rights, but in 2l8
BOOK II. I. 17-24
it does not bite. The paltry body must be
separated from the bit of spirit, either now or later,
just as it existed apart from it before. Why are you
grieved, then, if it be separated now ? For if it be
not separated now, it will be later. Why ? So that
the revolution of the universe may be accomplished ; ^ for it has need of the things that are now coming into
being, and the things that shall be, and the things
that have been accomplished. What is hardship ? A
bugbear. Turn it about and learn what it is. The
poor flesh is subjected to rough treatment, and then
again to smooth. If you do not find this profitable,
the door stands open ; if you do find it profitable,
bear it. For the door must be standing open for every emergency, and then we have no trouble.
What, then, is the fruit of these doctrines ? Precisely that which must needs be both the fairest and the most becoming for those who are being
truly educated —tranquillity, fearlessness, freedom.
For on these matters we should not trust the
multitude, who say, "Only the free can be
educated," but rather the philosophers, who say,
"Only the educated are free."—How is that.'
—
Thus: At this time^ is freedom anything but the
right to live as we wish ? " Nothing else." Tell
me, then, O men, do you wish to live in error ? "W^e do not." Well, no one who lives in error is free. Do you wish to live in fear, in sorrow, in turmoil ? " By no means." Well then, no man who
the time of Epictetus, under the Roman rule, it meant
nothing more than the privilege to live the kind of life that one pleased under the authority of the Imperial government.
There is a play also on the double meaning of free, i.e., in a
social and in a moral sense. 219
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(f)o^ovfi€Vo<: oiire Xvirovfievo^ ovtc rapacaofievo'^
i\.evdepo<i eaTiv, oarif; 3' aTnjWaKTai Xvttmp
Kal (po^cov Koi rapa^Siv, ovto<; tj} avrfi 6S&) 25 Kal Tov BovXeveiv dinjWaKTai. ttw? ovu €ti
vfilv Tncnevaop.ev, w ^iXraToi vofMoOerat; ovk
erriTpeTTOfiev TraiSeveodai, el firj roi<; eXev6epoi<i;
01 (f)tX6ao(f}ot yap Xijouaiv ore ovk iirLTpiiTOixev
iXevdepoi<; elvai el p^rj toi<; 7r€TratS€vp,evoc<i, rovro
26 i(TTip 6 Oeo<; ovk eTriTpiiTei. —"Orav ovv cnpe^^ Ti?
iirX (TTpaTrjyov top aurov SovXov, ovBev eiroirjaev; — KTroLTjcrev. —Tt;— KaTpeyjrev top avrov 8ovXop
eVt (TTparijyov.—"AXXo ovSep ; —Nat* Kai cIko27
aTTjv avTov Bovpai 6(f)eiXei.—Tt ovp ; 6 Tavra
iradcop ov yeyopep iXevdepo^
;
—Ov fiaXXop rj 28 dTdpaXo<i- eVei cry o aXXov<; (TTp€(f)€tP Svpdpepo^
ovBepa e)(€i<; Kvpiop; ovk dpyupiop, ov Kopdariop, ov TratBdpiop, ov top rvpavpop, ov ^lXop rcva tov
rvpdppov ; ri ovp rp€p,€i<; eVt ripa roiainrjp diriMP
Trepiaracnp ; 29 Afa TOVTo Xeyw iroXXaKC^ " Tavra peXeraTe Kal
Tavra irpo-x^eipa e)(^ere, Trpo? ripa Bel redapprjKepai
Kal 7rpo9 rii a evXa^o)^ BiaKeicrOat, on Trpo? rd
dTTpoaipera Oappelp, evXa^etadai rd rrpoaipertKd.
30 —'AXX,' OVK dpeypoip croi ovB' eypw<; n rroto) ;—
31 'Ei/ tIpl ; ip X€^€iBloi<;. e^^ crov rd Xe^elBia'
Bei^op, TTfti? e%et9 tt/oo? ope^ip Kal eKKXiaiP, el p,rj
^ Part of the ceremony of manumission in Roman law. The tax of "five per cent." mentioned just below is the fee that had to be paid to the State.
* The words of a pupil who has read and correctly
interpreted some passage set him, or has read aloud to Epictetus some essay of his own composition.
BOOK II. I. 24-31
is in fear, or sorrow, or turmoil, is free, but whoever
is rid of sorrows and fears and turmoils, this man is by the self-same course rid also of slavery. How,
then, shall we any longer trust you, O dearest
lawgivers? Do we allow none but the free to get an education ? For the philosophers say, " We do
not allow any but the educated to be free " ; that is, God does not allow it. —When, therefore, in the
presence of the praetor a man turns his own slave
about, has he done nothing?^—He has done
something. —What?—He has turned his slave about
in the presence of the praetor,—Nothing more ?
—
Yes, he is bound to pay a tax of five per cent, of the
slave's value. —What then ? Has not the man to whom this has been done become free? —He has no
more become free than he has acquired peace of
mind. You, for example, who are able to turn
others about, have you no master ? Have you not
as your master money, or a mistress, or a boy
favourite, or the tyrant, or some friend of the tyrant ? If not, why do you tremble when you goto face some
circumstance involving those things ? That is why I say over and over again, " Practise
these things and have them ready at hand, that is, the knowledge of what you ought to face with
confidence, and what you ought to face with
caution—that you ought to face with confidence
that which is outside the province of the moral
purpose, with caution that which is within the
province of the moral purpose."—But have I not
read to you, and do you not know what I am
doing ?
2—What have you been engaged upon ? Trifling phrases ! Keep your trifling phrases
!
Show me rather how you stand in regard to desire
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
aTTOTvyx^dvet'; cov OiX€i<i, el fir) irepciri'irret'i 0I9 ov
0i\ei<;. eKelva Se ra irepiohia, av vovv €XV*>' o.pa<i 32 irov TTOTC dTraXeLyjfeif;.—Tt ovv; '^wKparr}'; ovk
eypiKpev ;—Kal Tt9 rocravra; dWa ttw? ; eTrei
firj iSvvaro e')(eiv del rov i\€j)(^ovTa avrov rd
SoyfiaTa rj iXeyxdricropLevov iv t&) fiepei, avro<i eavrov ijXeyx^ev xal i^ijra^ev kuI del fxiav ye Tiva
33 TrpoXrjyfnv eyvfiva^ev ')(pr]aTiKa)^. ravra ypd<f)ei
(fii\6ao(f)o<;' Xe^etSca Se Kal " 77 5' 09," " ^v 5' eyci)" ^ dWoL<i d(f)Lr](Ti, T0t9 dvaL(jdriroi<; rj Tot<; ixaKapioi<i,
Tot<? a~)(o\rjv dyovcnv viro drapa^iaii rj rol^ firjSev
T(ov e^rj<i v7ro\oyi^ofM€voi<: Sid ficopiav. 34 Kal vvv Kaipov kuXovvto^; eKelva Sei^et? dir- e\da)v Kal dvayvcoarj Kal efiTrepTrepeva-rj ; " l8ov, 35 TTW? 8ia\6yov<; (rvvTldrip,i." fitj, avdpwTTe, aXX'
eKelva jxdWov " ihov, iraxi opeyo/jievo^ ovk dTTOTvy)(dv(0.
I80V, TTft)? eKKXivwv ov iTepnri-moi.
(f)epe ddvarov koX yvcoa-r]' (pepe 'irovov<i, (f)epe
8e(Tfi(OTi]piov, (pepe dSo^iav, (pepe KaTaSiKrjv."
36 avTi] eiriSei^i'i veov eK a')(o\rj<; eXrjXvOoro^. rdXXa
8' dXXoi<; d<pe^, firjSe <f>a>vrjv Tt9 dKovarj aov
TTepl avToJv TTOTe p.rjS', dv eiraivear] ti^ eV avTOi^,
dve')(pv, So^ov Se /xijBeU elvat Kal elhevai p,i}hev.
^ Kronenberg: ^ 65bi ^v \4y** S {K4ya> Sc).
^ A very strange passage, for it was generally believed that Socrates did not write. Still there seems to have been some doubt on the question (Diog. Laert. I. 16 makes the statement that he did not write as resting "on the authority of some"), and the style of writing which
Epictetus here describes seems not to have been intended for publication, so that it may be possible that Socrates wrote
copiously, but only as a philosophical exercise, and not for others to read. 222
BOOK II. I. 31-36
and aversion, whether you do not fail to get what
you wish, or do not fall into what you do not wish.
As for those trifling periods of yours, if you are wise,
you will take them away somewhere and blot them
out. —What then ? Did not Socrates write } —Yes,
who wrote as much as he ? ^ But how .' Since he
could not have always at hand someone to test his judgements, or to be tested by him in turn, he was
in the habit of testing and examining himself, and
was always in a practical way trying out some
particular primary conception. That is what a philosopher writes ; but trifling phrases, and " said
he," "said I " '^ he leaves to others, to the stupid or the blessed, those who by virtue of their tranquillity
live at leisure, or those who by virtue of their folly
take no account of logical conclusions.
And now, when the crisis calls, will you go off and
make an exhibition of your compositions, and give
a reading from them, and boast, " See, how I write
dialogues " .•* Do not so, man, but rather boast as follows : " See how in my desire I do not fail to get
what I wish. See how in my aversions I do not
fall into things that I would avoid. Bring on death
and you shall know ; bring on hardships, bring on
imprisonment, bring on disrepute, bring on con- demnation." This is the proper exhibition of a young man come from school. Leave other things
to other people ; neither let anyone ever hear a word
from you about them, nor, if anyone praises you for
them, do you tolerate it, but let yourself be ac- counted a no-body and a know-nothing. Show
* Characteristic expressions in dialogue, an cRpecially
popular t3'pe of composition for philosophy which aspired to a refined literary form; compare the critical note. 223
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
37 fiovov TovTO 6tSft)9 (ftaivov, ircof fiTjr aTroTV)^rj<i 38 TTore /x-^re irepnrearj'i. dWoi fieXeTaTcoa-av
oiKa^, dWoL Trpo^XjjfjLaTa, dWoi avWoyia-fiov^'
(TV aTTodvrjaKeiv, ah BeSiadai, (tv aTpe^Xovcrdai,
39 (TV e^opi^eadai. iravra ravra dappovvToa^, ire- irotdoTQ}^ T(p KCKXrjKOTi (T€ eV avrd, ra d^iov
tt}? ')((apa<; TavTT)<i xeKpcKOTi, iv rj KaTara-)(j9el^
€7rio€i^€i<i, TLva SvvaTat XoyiKov rjyefWvtKov 7rpo<i 40 Ta9 aTTpoaiperov^ Bvvdfj,ei<; avTira^d/xevov. koX
ovT(o<i TO TTapdho^ov eKelvo ovKeri ovr dSvvarov
(pavetraL ovre TrapdSo^ov, ore d/xa fiev evka^elcrdat,
hel d/na 8e dappetv, tt/jo? fxev to, dirpoaipsTa
dappelv, ev 5e Tol<i TrpoaipeTCKol'i evXa^eladai.
/9'. Yiepl cLTapa^ia^.
1 "Opa (TV 6 dvicov sttI rrjv SiKijv, ri OeX€i<i 2 Trjprjcrai koI irov dekei^ avvcrai. el yap irpoaipeaiv
deKet,<i Trjprjaai Kara (f)vaiv e-)(ovaav, Trdcrd
(Toi d(T(f>dXeia, Trdad crot, evfidpeia, irpdyfui ovk
3 6%et9. rd yap irri (toI avre^ovaia koI (f)V(T€i eXevdepa deXcov rrjpijaat koX tovtoi^ dpKovp.evo<i
tIvo^ €tc i7ri(Trp€(f)r} ; rt? ydp avrSiV Kvpto^, ri<; 4 avrd Svvarat d(f>eXe(TOai ; el 6eXei<; alSt^fieov elvai KoX iriaro'i, Tt9 ovk edaet (T€ ; el diXei^ firj 324
1
BOOK II. 1. 37-11. 4
that you know this only—how you may never either
fail to get what you desire or fall into what you
avoid. Let others practise lawsuits, others problems,
others syllogisms ; do you practise how to die, how
to be enchained, how to be racked, how to be exiled.
Do all these things with confidence, with trust in Him
who has called you to face them and deemed you
worthy of this position, in which having once been
placed you shall exhibit what can be achieved by a
rational governing principle when arrayed against
the forces that lie outside the province of the moral
purpose. And thus the paradox of which we were
speaking will no longer appear either impossible or
paradoxical, namely, that at the same time we ought
to be both cautious and confident, confident in regard
to those things that lie outside the province of the
moral purpose, and cautious in regard to those
things that lie within the province of the moral
purpose.
CHAPTER II On tranquillity
Consider, you who are going to court, what you
wish to maintain and wherein you wish to succeed ; for if you wish to maintain freedom of moral purpose
in its natural condition, all security is yours, every
facility yours, you have no trouble. For if you are
willing to keep guard over those things which are under your direct authority and by nature free, and
if you are satisfied with them, what else do you care about ? For who is master ofthem, who can take them
away from you? If you wish to be self-respecting
and honourable, who is it that will not allow you ? 225
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
KcoXveaOai, /xrjS' dvayKci^eadat,, rt? <re avajKacrei
opeyeadai mv ov SoKel aoi, T19 eKKKiveiv a firj 6 4>alv€Tai <TOL ; aWa tl ; Trpd^et fxev aoi Tiva a
BoK€i (f)0^€pd elvat' 'iva Se koI eKKXivcov axna
6 iTddr]<i, TTO)^ Svvarai Troirjcrai ; orav ovv eVi trot ^ TO opeyeaOai koX eKKXvveiv, rivo^ en ctti- 7 (TTpe^T) ; TOVTO (TOC irpOOL/jLtOV, TOVTO BLT]yr](ri<i,
TOVTO TTtCTTt?, TOVTO VLKTJ, TOVTO CTTcXoyO^, TOVTO
€vSoKi/J.r]ai<;. 8 Aid TOVTO 6 'EcOKpaTT)^ TrpO? TOV VTTOfMtflV^- aKovTa, iva napaaKevd^rjTai 7rp6^ ttju SIktjv,
e(jir] " ov BoKO) ovv croi diravTi tw /8t&) Trpo? tovto
9 7TapaaK€vd^€crOai ;"—" Holav irapaaKev^v ; "—
" TcTijprjKa," <f)T)(Tiv, " TO iir ifwL"—" lift)? ovv
;
KJvoev ovoeiroT aoiKOv ovt loua ovt€
10 hrjixoaia eTr/ja^a." el he deXei'; koX tu €kto^
TTjprjcrai, TO awp-dTiov koI to ovalSiov koI to d^caypdTtov,
/Ve7&) (Tor TjSrj avToOev irapacTKevd^ov ttjv
BvvaTTjv TTapacTKevrjv trdaav koI Xoittov aKeiTTov
11 KOl T>]V (pVaiVTOV SlKaCTTOV Koi TOV dvTiSlKOV. el jovdT(ov d-y^aadai Set, yovaTcov dylraf el kXuv12
(rat, KXavaov el olpco^ai, otfico^ov. otuv yap
V7rodfj<; Ta ad Tol<i €«to<?, BovXeve to Xocttov xal
fir] dvTiaiTOi Ka\ ttotI fiev deXe SovXeveiv, ttotc
13 Se fXTj diXe, dXX,' aTrXco? xal i^ oXr]<; rr}? Biavola^
rj TavTa rj exelva' rj eXevdepo^ rj SovXo^, rj ireiraiBevp,€vo<i
rj diralBevTO^, rj yevvalo<i dXexTpvoiv rj dyevvrj<i, rj vnofieve TfTTTo/ievo?, fxexpt'i dv drro-
^ A somewhat free version of what Xenophon records in his Apology, 2 f, 226
BOOK II. II. 4-13
If you wish not to be hindered nor compelled, what
man will compel you to desire what does not seem
to you to be desirable, to avoid what you do not feel should be avoided? Well, what then? The judge
will do some things to you which are thought to be
terrifying ; but how can he make you try to avoid
what you suffer ? When, therefore, desire and
aversion are under your own control, what more do
you care for ? This is your introduction, this the
setting forth of your case, this your proof, this your
victory, this your peroration, this your approbation.
That is why Socrates, in reply to the man who
was reminding him to make preparation for his trial,
said, " Do you not feel, then, that with my whole
life I am making preparation for this ? "—" What
kind of preparation?"—"I have maintained," says
he, " that which is under my control."—" How
then?" —"I have never done anything that was wrong either in my private or in my public life."^ But if you wish to maintain also what is external,
your paltry body and your petty estate and your
small reputation, I have this to say to you : Begin
this very moment to make all possible preparation,
and furthermore study the character of your judge
and your antagonist. If you must clasp men's
knees, clasp them; if you must wail, then wail;
if you must groan, then groan. For when you subject
what is your own to externals, then from
henceforth be a slave, and stop letting yourself be
drawn this way and that, at one moment wishing
to be a slave, at another not, but be either this or that simply and with all your mind, either a free
man or a slave, either educated or uneducated,
cither a spirited fighting cock or a spiritless one,
227
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
6dvr]<i, fj a.'rra'yopevcrov €vdv<i. firj croi 'yevono
ifkrj'ya'i 7roWa<; Xa^elv Koi varepov dirayopev14
aai. el 8 altr^pd TavTU, avroOev IjBrj SieXe " ttov
(f}vai<i KUKav Koi ci'yaOoiv ; ov Kal (Wi]deia. ottov d\r)6eia Kal ov ^ (f)vai^, e'/cet to euXa/Se?- ottov rj dXrjdeca, ixei ro dapf aXeov, oirov rj (f)vai'i." 15 'ETret Toi BoKet^, ore rd e«To? Ti]pf]crat deXwv
XcoKpdrrj^ irapeXdoiV dv eXeje " e/xe 5' "Ai-uto?
Kal MeX.7?T09 dTTOKTelvai fiev Svvavrai, ^Xd^frai
16 8' ov"; ovTco fMwpo'i rjv, tva fxrj Ihrj on avrrj rj 0809 ivravOa ov (ficpei, dXX^ dXXr/ ; rl ovv icniv,
17 OTi ovK ex^i Xoyov Kal TrpoaepeOl^eiv ^ ; to? o
e/i09 'VipdKXeiro^; irepl dypiBiov Trpayp-driov
€')(a>v ev 'Po8ft) Kal d7ro8et^a<; toI<; SiKacrrat^; ore BtKaia Xeyei iXOoov ivl rov eirlXoyov e(f)r) oti " aXX' ovT€ herjaopai vpiMv ovt €7riaTpe(f)op,ai, ri fieXXeTC Kpivetv vpel<i re fidXXov oi KpLvop^evoi
icTTC rj eyw. Kal ovroi<i Karearpe^e to irpayp.d18
riov. Ti9 Xpei'a ; /jlovov fj,r) Beov, fir) irpocrTcdei
S' OTt " Kal ov Beopac, el p-tj ti Kaipo^ eariv
iirvrriBe'i epedlaai tov<; BcKaard^ a)9 XcoKpdrei.
19 Kal (TV el TOiovTov eiriXoyov TrapaaKevd^ij, ti 20 dva^alveL<i, tl v7raKovei<; ; el yap aravpcodrjvai
* Schegk : ov S.
* Bentley: trpoafpeOi^ti S.
^ These last three sentences make no satisfactory sense in themselves, and none of the numerous emendations which
have been offered seem convincing, while at the same time
they interrupt the course of the argument where they stand.
It would appear, as Schenkl suggests, that they constitute a seriously mutilated section of the preceding chapter
(possibly from the very end), which by some accident has become imbedded in an alien context. 228
BOOK II. II. 13-20
either endure to be beaten until you die, or give in
at once. Far be it from you to recei\ e many blows
and yet at the last give in ! But if that is dis- graceful, begin this very moment to decide the
question, " Where is the nature of good and evil to be found ? Where truth also is. Where truth
and where nature are, there is caution ; where truth
is, there is confidence, where nature is." ^ Why, do you think that if Socrates had wished
to maintain his external possessions he would have
come forward and said, " Anytus and Meletus are able indeed to kill me, but they cannot harm me " ? Was he so foolish as not to see that this course does
not lead to that goal, but elsewhere } Why is it unreasonable, then, to add also a word of provocation
.' Just as my friend Heracleitus, who had an
unimportant lawsuit about a small piece of land in Rhodes; after he had pointed out the justice of his
claim he went on to the peroration in which he said, " But neither will I entreat you, nor do I care what
your decision is going to be, and it is you who are on trial rather than I." And so he ruined his case. What is the use of acting like that? Merely make
no entreaties, but do not add the words " Yes, and
I make no entreaties," unless the right time has
come for you, as it did for Socrates, deliberately to provoke your judges. If you, for your part, are preparing a peroration of that sort, why do you
mount the platform at all, whv answer the summons ? ^ For if you wish to be crucified, wait and the cross
* That is, it is a sheer waste of effort to speak in so provocative a manner as to invite condemnation. If that is what you wish, simply do nothing at all and you will gain
your end. 329
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
deXei^, eKSe^ai koI ij^ec 6 aravpot;' el K viraKovaat,
\6yo^ alpel Koi irelaai to ye irap' avrov,
TO, e^r}<f Tovrw Troirjreov rrjpovvrt fxevTOC ra i8ca.
21 TavTj] Kol yeXoiov icrri to Xeyeiv " vtrodov fioi." Tt croi vTroOwfiai ; aWa " Trolrjaov fiov rrjv Bidvoiav
6 Tt av (nro^aivr] 7rpo<; tovto apfiocraadai."
22 eVel eKeivo ye Ofioiov ecniv olov el aypa[i}xaTot
\kyoi " elrce p,oi tI ypdylro), otuv fxoi irpo^XriOfi
23 rt ovofia." av yap etTro) otl Aicov, elra irapeXOoov
eKeivo^ avTw trpo^dX-rj firj to Ai(ovo<; ovofxa, 24 dXXa TO &€covo<i, Ti yevrjTai ; tL ypd-^ ; aXV el fiev p-e/j.€XeTrjKa<; ypd^etv, e^eif Kal TrapacrKcvdaacrdai,
^ tt/jo? irdvTa to, virayopevop-eva' el 8e
p,r), TL aoi iyoD vvv virodco/jLai ; av yap dXXo ri virayopevr) to, irpdy/xaTa, tL ipelf; rj tC irpd^ei^; ; 26 TOUTOf ovv Tov KadoXiKOV /jLefivrjao kuI v7rodrJKi]<;
ovK d7roprjaei<i. edv he Trp6<; to, e^co 'y^daKr}<;,
dvdy/cij are dvco kuI kutw KvXiecrdai Trpo? to
26 ^ovXr^fxa tov KvpCov- Tt? 8' ecTt Kvpto^ ; 6 t&v
VTTo (TOV TLV0<i cnTovha^ofiev(ov rj eKKXivo/xevtov
e')(03V e^ovatav.
y . Il/jo? Tov'i <Tvvi<TTdvTa<i Tcva^ Toi<i
(f}iXoao(f>oi'i
KaX&)9 6 Ai.oyevr]<; 7r/309 tov d^iovvTU ypdp,-
fiUTu Trap' avTov Xa^elv crvaTaTiKa " oti fiev
dvdpco7ro<;,^^ (pTjcrlv, " el, Kal ISoov yvaoaeTat' el S'
* Upton from his "codex " irapaaKevdjai S. 230
BOOK II. II. 20-III. I
will come ; but if reason decides that you should answer the summons and do your best to have what
you say carry conviction, you must act in accordance
therewith, but always maintaining what is your own
proper character.
Looked at in this way it is also absurd to say, " Advise me." What advice am I to give you ? Nay, say rather, " Enable my mind to adapt itself to whatever comes." Since the other expression is just as if an illiterate should say, "Tell me what to write when some name is set me to write." For if
I say, " Write Dio," and then his teacher comes
along and sets him not the name " Dio," but
"Theo," what will happen? What will he write ? But if you have practised writing, you are able also
to prepare yourself for everything that is dictated
to you ; if you have not practised, what advice can
I now offer you ? For if circumstances dictate something
different, what will you say or what will you
do? Bear in mind, therefore, this general principle
and you will not be at a loss for a suggestion. But
if you gape open-mouthed at externals, you must
needs be tossed up and down according to the will of your master. And who is your master ? He
who has authority over any of the things upon
which you set your heart or which you wish to
avoid.
CHAPTER III To those who recommend persons to the philosophers
That is an excellent answer of Diogenes to the
man who asked for a letter of recommendation from
him : " That you are a man," he says, " he will
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
aya06<; rj KaKo<i, el fxev e/MTreipo^ iari Siayvwvai
Toi/? dyaOovii Kal KaKov<i, yvwaerai, el S" ctTreipof, 2 oyS' av /.ivpiaKi^; jpdylrco avTw." ofioiov yap
oicxirep el Spay^fxij avcrraOrivaL tivi r^^iov, Iva
SoKip,aa6r}. el dpyvpoyvQ)p,oviK6<; ecmv, <jv aav3
rrjv avaTr]aei<i. eSei ovv TOtovrov ti e^eiv rjpd'i
Kol ev Tw ^ia> olov ctt' dpyvplov, Xv elirelv Bvvcofiai
KaOdirep 6 dpyvpoyv(op.o)v \eyei " (f)epe rjv 4 deXei^ hpaj(^pi,r)v KaX Biayvcoaop-ac.^ a\X etn, avWoytafj,Q)v " <^epe ov 6eXei<; koI SiUKpiPo!) aoc TOP dvaXvriKov re /cat pLi]" Bia ri ; olBa yap
dvaXveiv crvX\oyicTfiov<;' e^o) T7]v hvvapnv, rjv
e^etf Set tov eTriyvaarcKov tcov irepl avXXo5
yiapLOv^; Karnp6ovvT(ov, eirl he tov /Slov rt iroio) ; vvv fiev Xe7«i) dyaOov, vvv he KaKov. tl to airiov ; TO evavriov rj eVt rS)v avXXoyicrp.(i)v, d/xadia Kal
direipia.
8'. 11/009 TOV iirl fioiX^ta ttotc KareiXrjfifievov
Keyovro<i aiiTov on 'O dvdpco7ro<i irpo'i irvariv
yeyovev kuI tovto 6 dvarpeTTCov dvarpeirei to
chiov tov dvOpcoTTOV, eTreLcrrfxOev Ti<i twv hoKOvvT(ov
(f)iXoX6yQ)v, 09 KaTeiXrjTTTO TroTe p,oi'Xp<i ev
* This is Wolf's interpretation of the rare word avaXvnKSs,
i.e., as referring to a syllogism. But Upton, Schweighauser,
and others take it in the sense of "a person who is capable of analyzing syllogisms." The former interpretation fits the preceding sentence better, the latter the following sentence. As in § 3 the assayer of silver and the assayer of character
are blended, so here apparently the transition from the
syllogism to those who handle it is made somewhat abruptly.
232
BOOK II. III. i-iv. I
kxiow at a glance ; but whether you are a good or a bad man he will discover if he has the skill to
distinguish between good and bad, and if he is without
that skill he will not discover the facts, even though I write him thousands of times." For it is just as though a drachma asked to be recommended
to someone, in order to be tested. If the man in
question is an assayer of silver, you will recommend
yourself. We ought, therefore, to have also in
everyday life the sort of thing that we have in the
case of silver, so that I may be able to say, as the
assayer of silver says, " Bring me any drachma you
please, and I will appraise it." Now in the case of syllogisms I say, " Bring me any you please and I will distinguish for you between the one that is capable of analysis and the one that is not." ^ How
so.^ Because, I know how to analyze syllogisms
myself; I have the faculty which the man must have
who is going to appraise those who handle syllogisms
properly. But in everyday life what do I do r Sometimes I call a thing good, and sometimes bad.
What is the reason r The opposite of what was true
in the case of syllogisms, namely, ignorance and
inexperience.
CHAPTER IV
To the man mho had once been caught in adultery
As Epictetus was remarking that man is bom to
fidelity, and that the man who overthrows this is overthrowing the characteristic quality of man, there
entered one who had the reputation of being a
scholar, and who had once been caught in the city
233
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
2 TJ} troXei. 6 S' 'A\V av, (ftrjaiv, a<f>evT€^ tovto
TO TTicrrov, Trpo? 6 7r€(f>VKafi€V, eTTi/SovXevcofiev ttj
yvvaiKi Tov yeirovo^, ri 7roiovfj.€v ; ri yap dWo
7] airoWvfiev koI avaipovfj^v ; riva ; tov iriarop,
3 TOV alhrjfiova, tov oaiov. raOra p.6va ; yeiTviaaiv
8 ovK dvaipovfiev, (jiikiav S' ov, ttoXiv S' ov ; et? Tiva Be ^(opav avTov<i KaTUTaaaofiev
;
u><i TLVL aoi )(^poi[xai., avSpcoTre ; &)<? yeiTQvi, o)?
(f)LXa) ; TTOtft) Tivl ; &)? ttoXlttj ; tL aot TriaTevao) ; 4 etTa aKevdpiov fiev el 979 ovTCo^i aairpov, oiare
aoi 7r/309 firjBev SvvacrOai x^prjadai, e^to av irrl Ta? Koirpia^ eppifTTOV koI ov8' eKeWev av Tt? ae
5 dvrjpelTO' el 8^ dvOpcoTTo^ oiv ovhepiav y^uypav
8vvaaa(, diroTrXrjpoia-ai dvdpcoTTiKrjv, tI ae iroirjaopev
; eaTto yap, (plXov ov Bvvaaai tottov €')(€iv- BovXou 8vvaaat, ; kuI Tt9 (toi TriaTevcrec ; ov
deXeit ovv pL<^rjvat ttov Kal avTo^ iirl Koirpiav
6 o)? (TKevo^ d^pT](TTOv, a>9 Konrpiov ; eiTa epeU
" ovSei^ fiov iTn(TTpe<f)€Tac, dv9pdairov <f)iXoX6-
yov "
; KUKo^i yap el Kal d')(^pr]crT0<;. olov el ol
a(f>fJK€<i ^ TjyavdKTOvv, OTi ovBelf; avTcov eiria-Tpe-
(f>eTai, dXXa (pevyovai travTe^ kclv ti<: BuvrjTai,,
7 7rXi]^a<i KaTe^aXev. av KevTpov e%et9 tolovtov,
cjcTTe ov dv ttXtj^t)!; et? Trpdy/Mara Kal oSyj/a?
€p,fidXX€iv. Tt ae ^eXe/? Troi'^a-cofiev ; ovk e^ei^
TTOV TeOfjf;. 8 Tt OVV ; OVK elalv al yvvatKe<; Koival (f)va€i
;
Kayod Xeyco. Kal yap to ^oipi8iov KOivov tcov
^ Upton : ffKa>\rjKes S.
^ A not uncommon social theory in antiquity, to which the
Stoics also subscribed (Diog. Laert. VII. 33 and 131); but
234
BOOK II. IV. 1-8
in the act of adultery. But, goes on Epictetus,
if we abandon this fidelity to which we are by
nature born, and make designs against our neighbour's
wife, what are we doing? Why, what but
ruining and destroying .' Whom ? The man of
fidelity, of self-respect, of piety. Is that all ? Are
we not overthrowing also neighbourly feeling,
friendship, the state ? In what position are we
placing ourselves .'' As what am I to treat you,
fellow ? As a neighbour, as a friend ? Of what
kind ? As a citizen ? What confidence am I to place in you .'' If you were a vessel so cracked that
it was impossible to use you for anything, you would
be cast forth upon the dunghills and even from
there no one would pick you up ; but if, although a man, you cannot fill a man's place, what are we
going to do with you ? For, assuming that you can- not hold the place of a friend, can you hold that of a
slave ? And who is going to trust you ? Are you
not willing, therefore, that you too should be cast forth upon some dunghill as a useless vessel, as a piece of dung ? For all that will you say, " Nobody
cares for me, a scholar ! " ? No, for you are an evil man,
and useless. It is just as if the wasps complained
that nobody cares for them, but all run away from
them, and, if anyone can, he strikes them and
knocks them down. You have such a sting that you
involve in trouble and pain whomever you strike. What do you want us to do with you ? There is no
place where you can be put.
What then, you say ; are not women by nature
common property .' ^ I agree. And the little pig is Epictetus accepts the doctrine only with such limitations as make it compatible with ordinary matrimonal institations. Compare also frag. 15, where he recurs to the topic.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
K€K\r]fj£VO)V' aXV orav fieprj yevijTat, av croi
<f)avfj, dvapiraaov avekdoov * to tov irapaKaraKeifievov
fi€po<i, \dOpa K\eyp-ov rj irapaKadel'i rrjv
j^etyoa \i')(ii€V€, /cdv fiTj hvvrj rov Kpeco<; d-KoaTrdaai,
XiTraive tov^ BaKTvXov<; xal TrepiKeL^e.
Ka\o<i avfiiroTrj^ kol (rvv8enrvo<; ^lOKpariKo^;.
9 aye, to Be Oearpov ovk eari koivov rcov ttoXitmv ; orav ovv Kadicrwaiv, eXdcov, dv aoi cfyavj}, e«/9a\e
10 Tiva avTMV. ovtco^ kuI ai yuvaixe^ <^vaei Koivai. orav S' vofiodeT7j<; to? eaTidTcop SciXij avrd^, ov
6e\ei<i Koi avTo<; lSiov p,epo^ ^rjrelv, dWd to
dWorpiov vf^aptrd^ei'i koI \i)(yeveL<i ; " dXkd
11 (^4X0X070? eifii Koi *Ap)(^e8r}p,ov voo)" 'Ap^eBrj-
/xov TOLvvv vooiv /jL0t)(^6<; icrOi /cal d7rcaT0<; kuI
dvTi dvdpcoTTOV XvKo^ rj ttlOijkoi:. tl yap
€. IIco? crvvvTrdp-)(€i, fi€yaXo<Ppo<Tvvr) Kal
eTTifieXeia ;
1 At vXai, dBidcpopoi, rj Be )(^pf]cn.<i avTCov ovk
2 dBid(f)opo<i. TTOi><; ovv TijpTjarj ti<{ ap,a fxev to
evaTade<i xal aTdpa^ov, dfia Be to iirip^Xes Kal
fiT) elKalov firjS' iinaeavpfievov ; dv fMi/j,r]Tai
* ixdiiv Upton : atrf\dwv Sohenkl.
* The reference is probably to the Symposia by Plato and
Xenophon.
* Possibly the Stoic philosopher of Tarsus (Plut. de Exil. 14), but more likely the rhetorician who commented upon a portion
236
BOOK II. IV. 8-v. 2
the common property of the invited guests ; but
when portions have been assigned, if it so pleases
you, approach and snatch up the portion of the guest
who reclines at your side, steal it secretly, or slip in
your hand and glut your greed, and if you cannot
tear off a piece of the meat, get your fingers greasy
and lick them. A fine companion you would make
at a feast, and a dinner-guest worthy of Socrates I ^ Come now, is not the theatre the common property
of the citizens ? When, therefore, they are seated
there, go, if it so pleases you, and throw someone of
them out of his seat. In the same way women also are by nature common property. But when the lawgiver,
like a host at a banquet, has apportioned them,
are you not willing like the rest to look for your own
portion instead of filching away and glutting your
greed upon that which is another's ? " But I am a scholar and understand Archedemus."* Very well
then, understand Archedemus and be an adulterer
and faithless and a wolf or an ape instead of a man ; for what is there to prevent you ?
CHAPTER V
How are magnanimity and carefulness compatible ? Materials are indifferent, but the use which we
make of them is not a matter of indifference. How,
therefore, shall a man maintain steadfastness and
peace of mind, and at the same time the careful
spirit and that which is neither reckless nor
negligent } If he imitates those who play at dice.
of Aristotle's PJut&rie (Quintilian, IlL 6. 31 and 33), if these be really different persons, which is not entirely certain. 237
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
3 TOi'9 Kv^€vovTa<;. ai yfrr]<poi, dBid(f>opoi, oi Kvfioi
d8id(f)opoi' nrodev olSa, ri /xiWec TriTTTeiv ; tw
rreaovTi S eVi/ieXw? koL re')(yiK(a<i )(^prj(rdai, tovto
4 ijBrj i/j,ov epyov ecrriv. ovtco^ tolvvv to fxev Trporjyovfxevov Kal eVl tov ^iov epyov eKclvo'
SieXe ra rrpdj/xaTa Koi SidaTTjaov Kal etVe " rd
5 €^(o ovK eV ifiol' Trpoaipeai'i eir ipboi. ttov
l^r]rrj(T(jci to dyaOov Kal to KaKOV ; eaco ev TOt?
e/iOi9." ev Be Tot9 aXXoTptot? firfBeirore fijjr
dyaOov ovo/xdcTT}^ fi-^Te KaKov p,i]T axpeXeiav /jl^tc
I3\d^r]v jxrjT dXko ri tcov toiovtcov.
6 Tt ovv ; dfX€Xc!)<i TOVTOi<i '^prja-Teov ; ov8afjba)<;.
TOVTO yap irdXiv ttj irpoaipeaec kukov ecTTi /cat 7 TavTT) ^ Trapa ^vaiv. a\X' dpxi fiev e7ri.fie\oi)<i, OTi rj ')(prj(TL<i OVK d8id<j)opov, dfia S" ev(TTadS)<i KaX
8 aTapa^j^ft)?, otl 17 vXrj ov 8ta(f)€povaa. ottov yap
TO Biacpepov, cKei oine KwXvaai fie ri<; BvvaTat,
ovT dvayKaaai. ottov k(i)\vto<; koI dvayKaaTo^;
elfii, eKsivoov rj fiev Tev^i<i ovk ctt' e'/xot ovS'
dyadov rj kukov, 77 )(pr]ai^ 8* rj KaKOV rj dyadov,
9 aXX' eV ifioi. 8v(Jko\ov 8e fxl^ai Kal avvayayelv
TavTa, eTTCfieXeiav tov rrpoaTreTrovdoTOf; Tat<; vXai<;
Kal evaTaOeiav tov dveiricrTpeiTTOvvTO^, rrXrjv ovk
dhvvaTov. el Be fii'j, dBvvaTOv to evBai/iovrjaat.
10 dXX" olov Ti i-Trl tov ttXov iroiovfiev. tl fioi BvvaTai ; to eKXe^aaOai tov Kv^epvijTTjv, tou?
11 vavTa^, TTjv Tjfiepav, tov Kaipov. eiTa ^ei/xcov
^ ravTTiv rijv 8 : ravrri s : Tijv deleted by Schenkl. 238
BOOK II. V. 2-1
1
The counters are indifferent, the dice are indifferent
;
how am I to know what is going to fall ? But to make a careful and skilful use of what has fallen,
that is now my task.^ In like manner, therefore,
the principal task in life is this : distinguish matters
and weigh them one against another, and say to
yourself, " Externals are not under my control ; moral choice is under my control. Where am I to look for the good and the evil ? Within me, in that
which is my own." But in that which is another's never employ the words "good" or "evil,'' or " benefit " or " injury," or anything of the sort. What then ? Are these externals to be used
carelessly? Not at all. For this again is to the
moral purpose an evil and thus unnatural to it. They must be used carefully, because their use is not a matter of indifference, and at the same time
with steadfastness and peace of mind, because the
material is indifferent. For in whatever really con- cerns us, there no man can either hinder or compel
me. The attainment of those things in which I can be hindered or compelled is not under my control and
is neither good nor bad, but the use which I make
of them is either good or bad, and that is under my
control. It is, indeed, difficult to unite and combine
these two things—the carefulness of the man who is devoted to material things and the steadfastness
of the man who disregards them, but it is not impossible.
Otherwise happiness were impossible.
But we act very much as though we were on a voyage. What is possible for me ? To select the
helmsman, the sailors, the day, the moment. Then
^ Cf. Menander in the Ade!phoe of Terence, 740 f.
:
Si illud quod maxume opus est iacta non cadit,
niad quod cecidit forte, id arte at corrigas.
239
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
• efiTreirrcoKev. ri, ovv eVt jxoi fieXei ; to, <yap efia iKTre7r\7]pwTat,. aWov ecrrlv 97 virodeai^, rov
12 Kv^epvrjTOV. aX\.a koI t) vav<; Kai-ahverai. ri ovv e^co TTOLTJaai ; hvvafiai, tovto /jlovov ttoico'
fir] (f)o0ov/jievo<; aTTOTrvi'yo/xaL ovSe K€Kpaya)<; ouS'
ijKaXcoi' TO) 0€(p, aW etSco?, oti to yevofievov
13 Koi (pOaprjvai Bei. ov yap elfit, alcov, dX,V
avdpcoTTO'i, /jL€po<; roiv TrdvTcov c!)? &pa rjfi€pa<;.
€V(TTpjvaL fi€ Set CO? Tr]v bipav kol irapekOelv o)? 14 topav. Tt ovv fioi Bia<f>€p€i 7r<w9 irapiXOo), irorepov
TTviyeh rj irvpe^a^ ; Bia yap toiovtov tivo<; Bel
irapeXOelv fie. 15 ToOto o-\lrei iroiovvra^ /cal rovs a(f>aipi^ovTa<i
e/XTrelpco'i. ovBeU ovtmv Bia^iperai Trepl tov
aprraarov cb? TTepl ayadov rj KaKov, irepl Be tov
16 ^dWeiv Kal Be')(^6aOai. Xocttov ev tovtw 77 ev- pvdfita, iv TOVTCp rj TexvTj' "^^ Ta^o^, r] evyvcofjLoa-vvr],
IV iyco, firjB^ av tov koXttov €kt€lvco,
Bvvafiai ^ Xa0eiv avTO, 6 Be, av ^dX(o, Xa/x^d17
vei. av Be fxeTo, Tapa^V'^ kclI (f>6^ov Bex^ofieda
r) ^aXXcofiev avTO, iroia eTi TraiBid, iroii Be ti<; €V(Tra6i]aei, ttov Be Tt9 to e^rj^ oyfrsTai ev avTrj
;
aW' 6 ixev ipel " /SaX,e," Be^ " firj /SaX?;?," Be " fXT) ava^dXT)<;." ^ tovto Bt] fid-)(V icrTl xal ov
iraiBid.
^ Koraes : 5vvoi!/j.ai S.
« S Se added by Upton after Wolf.
• Oldfather-Capps : avipa\fs 8 : /xlav ipa\es Sc: avaXa^ris Richards.
* A variety of ball-playing among the Greeks consisted in tossing the ball back and forth between partners or team- mates (often in response to a call, Plutarch, Alex. 39, 3), while their opponents tried to get the ball away (Galen, de Farvae Pilae JCxerdtio, 2), somewhat as in the American
240
BOOK II. V. 11-17
a storm comes down upon us. Very well, what
further concern have I ? For my part has been
fulfilled. The business belongs to someone else,
that is, the helmsman. But, more than that, the
ship goes down. What, then, have I to do ? What
I can ; that is the only thing I do ; I drown without*
fear, neither shrieking nor crying out against God,
but recognizing that what is born must also perish.
For I am not eternal, but a man ; a part of the
whole, as an hour is part of a day. I must come
on as the hour and like an hour pass away. What
difference, then, is it tome how I pass away, whether
by drowning or by a fever? For by something of
the sort I must needs pass away.
This is what you will see skilful ball players doing
also. None of them is concerned about the ball as being something good or bad, but about throwing
and catching it. Accordingly, form has to do with
that, skill with that, and speed, and grace ; where
I cannot catch the ball even if I spread out my
cloak, the expert catches it if I throw. Yet if we
catch or throw the ball in a flurry or in fear, what
fun is there left, and how can a man be steady, or
see what comes next in the game ? But one player
will say '' Throw ! " another, " Don't throw I " and yet
another, "Don't throw it up ! " ^ That, indeed,
would be a strife and not a game.
games Keep-away and Basket-ball. An interesting series of
calls used in the game is given by Antiphanes in Athenaeus,
I. I5a, one of which, 6.vu, "Up!", may be the short form
of the positive of the call given in the text here. On the
ball-teams at Sparta see M. X. Tod, Annual of the British
School at Athens, 1903—i, 63 ff. Possibly one might read
ovaSoAjj, "Don't wait !" or "Don't stall !" which would fit the context admirably, although the use of PdWu in different senses within the same sentence would appear rather strange.
241
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
18 Toiyapovv ^a>KpdTr)<; pSei <r<paipi^€cv. ttw? ; TTUL^eiv ev T(p BiKaartjpiw. " Xeye poi,^^ ^rjcriv, " "Avvre, Tra)<; fie <pr}<i Oeov ov vo/xl^eiv ; oi haifxov€<;
(701 Ttve? etvai BoKOvaiv ; ov)(l tjtoi detav
7raiBe<i elaiv rj i^ dvdpcoTTCov Kal Oecov fxefxiyfievoi
19 Tiv€<i ;
' o/xo\oy>'](javTO'i Se " ri<i ovv croi SoKet
hvvacrOai rj/j,i6vou<; fiev -qyelcrdai €ivat, ovov^ hk
firj ;
' ax? dpTracnim Trai^oiv. Kal ri exei ev fxeaw
dpiracrriov tot' r]V^' ; to BeBecrdai, to (pvyaBevOrjvai,
TO irielv (pap/xaKov, to yvvaiKO<; d(f)aipe- 20 drjvai, to Te/cva 6p<pavd KaToKiirelv. raura rjv ev fieao) ol<; eirai^ev, dW ouBev t^ttov eirai^ev
Koi e(T(l>ai,pi^€v evpvOfiw^. ovtox; xal rjiMel^ ttjv fiev eTri/jLeXeiav cr(l)aipi(TTCK(OTdTTjv, ttjv 8' dBia21
(f)OpLav to? virep dpyracrTiov. Bel ydp rravTOi^
irepi Tiva tmv cVto? vXwv (piXoTexvelv, aXX' ovk
eKeivrjv d7roBe)(^6/j,evov, d\V oia dv rj eKeivrj, ttjv
Trepl avTTjv (piXoTe^^vLav eTriBeiKvvovTa. ovT(o<i Kal
6 vipdvTTjf; OVK epca Trocei, dXX" oca dv irapaXd^rj
22 irepl avTO, <pi,XoT€\vel. dXXo<i crot BiBcoa-t Tpo(pd<i
Kal KTrja-cv Kal avTa TavTa BvvaTai difteXecrOai
Kal TO awp-uTLOv avTO. <tv Xoittov nrapaXa^oov
23 T-qv vXrjv epyd^ov. etra dv e^eXOrj^ firjBev iradcov,
^ Elter : apTrd<rTiov rh ^v 8.
^ A term originally used of any spiritual power, and in early Greek often of the greatest gods, but in classical and
Hellenistic times coming generally to be restricted to spiritual essences of a lower rank. There is no adequate English word
which can be used in translation.
* A free paraphrase of the argument in Plato's Apology, 26e fF., obviously from merjiory, for the questions were put
by Socrates, not to Anytus, but to Meletus.—Socrates had
242
i
BOOK II. V. 18-23
In that sense, then, Socrates knew how to play
ball. How so? He knew how to play in the lawcourt.
"Tell me," says he, " Anytus, what do you
mean when you say that I do not believe in God.
In your opinion who are the daemones ? ^ Are they
not either the offspring of the gods or a hybrid race, the offspring of men and gods? " And when Anytus
had agreed to that statement Socrates went on, " Who, then, do you think, can believe that mules
exist, but not asses? " ^ In so speaking he was like a man playing ball. And at that place and time
what was the ball that he was playing with ? Imprisonment,
exile, drinking poison, being deprived
of wife, leaving children orphans. These were the
things with which he was playing, but none the
less he played and handled the ball in good form.
So ought we also to act, exhibiting the ball-player's
carefulness about the game, but the same indiffer- ence about the object played with, as being a mere
ball. For a man ought by all means to strive to show his skill in regard to some of the external
materials, yet without making the material a part
of himself, but merely lavishing his skill in regard
to it, whatever it may be. So also the weaver does
not make wool, but he lavishes his skill on whatever
wool he receives. Another' gives you sustenance
and property and can likewise take them away, yes,
and your paltry body itself. Do you accordingly
accept the material and work it up. Then if vou come forth without having suffered any harm, the
been charged with denying the existence of the gods, but at the same tinie introducing new daemons. If, however,
daemones are merely offspring of gods, then it is impossible
that both charges could be true of any sane man.
» That is, God.
243
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
01 /ji€V aXXoi airavTwyrh aoi avyyaprjcrovTai on
ea(iidr]<i, 6 S' et'Scb? ^Xerretv ra roiavra, av fxev
tBrj on, €V(T)(r)/x6v(0<; dvearpd(f)T)^ iv tovtm, iirai- veaet koX avvrjcxOrjaerar dv he hi da'^yjixoavvr^v
Tivd hiacrecroja-fievov, to, ivavTia. orrov yap ro
^(^acpeiv evXoyo)';, eKel koX to crvyy^^aipeiv. 24 ITw? ovv Xeyerai twv eKro^ nva Kara <pvaiv
Koi irapd (f)vaiv ; coanep dv el aTroXvroL rfp,ev. TcS yap TTohl Kara cfivaiv elvai ipco to KuOapw
elvat, dXX\ dv avrov 0)9 iroha Xdj3r)^ Kal to? p,r) djToXvTov, Kadri^ei avToi' Kal ei<i irrfXav ip,^aiveiv
Kal dKdvOa<i 7raTrj(rai Kal eanv ore aTroKOirrivai
virep rov oXov el he prj, ouKcn earai irov^. 25 TotouTOJ' n Kal e(^' rjpwv vrroXa^elv hel. n el
;
dvOpcoTTo^. el p,ev «? drroXuTOv aKoirel'i, KaTa
(pvaiv iarl ^ijcrai p^XP'' JVP^^' irXovrelv, vyiaiveiv.
el S' d>s dvOpwirov aKoirelf; val p,epo<i oXov
nv6<;, hi CKeivo to oXov vvv p,ev crot voatjcrai
KadrJKCi, vvv he irXevcrai Kal Kivhwevaai, vvv S' aTToprjdPjvai, irpo twpa? S' €(Tnv or dirodavetv.
26 Tt ovv dyavaKTei<; ; ovk oiha<; on to? CKeivo^
ovKeri earai irov^, ovreo^ ovhe av av9pwiro'i ; ti
yap eanv dvOpwiro'i ; pepo<; TToXeo)?, Trpcorrjii pev
Tfj<; eK Oeoiv Kal dvOpooTrtov, p,erd ravra he Trj<i
tt)9 eyyiara Xeyopevrj<;, rj ri ian piKpov t^9 bXT]<i 27 pipijpu. " vvv ovv €p,€ KpiveaOai
;
" vvv ovv dXXov TTvpeacreiv, dXXov TrXeiv, dXXov drrodvij-
^ That is, things which are natural for the part of a whole
to endure, appear unnatural, if that same part regards itself as a separate and independent entity.
* That is, existing separate and per se. 244
BOOK II. V. 23-27
others who meet you will congratulate you on your
escape, but the man who knows how to observe
such matters, if he sees that you have exhibited
good form in this affair, will praise you and rejoice
with you ; but if he sees that you owe your escape
to some dishonourable action, he will do the opposite.
For where a man may rejoice with good reason,
there others may rejoice with him.
How, then, can it be said that some externals are
natural, and others unnatural? It is just as if we
were detached from them.^ For I will assert of the
foot as such that it is natural for it to be clean, but
if you take it as a foot, and not as a thing detached,^
it will be appropriate for it to step into mud and
trample on thorns and sometimes to be cut off for the sake of the whole body ; otherwise it will no
longer be a foot. We ought to hold some such view
also about ourselves. What are you? A man. Now if you regard yourself as a thing detached, it
is natural for you to live to old age, to be rich, to enjoy health. But if you regard yourself as a man
and as a part of some whole, on account of that
whole it is fitting for you now to be sick, and now
to make a voyage and run risks, and now to be in want, and on occasion to die before your time.
Why, then, are you vexed ? Do you not know that as the foot, if detached, will no longer be a foot, so you too, if detached, will no longer be a man? For
what is a man ? A part of a state ; first of that
slate which is made up of gods and men, and then
of that which is said to be very close to the other,
the state that is a small copy of the universal state. "Must I, then, be put on trial now?" Well, would
you have someone else be sick of a fever now, some245
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(TKeiv, aWov KaraKeKplaOai ; ahvvarov yap iv
roLOVTW aco/xaTi, iv tovtw tu> Trepii^ovrc, rovroi^
Tot<i (Tv^oocTiv fx,r] av/xTTLTTTeiv dWoi<; aXXa roiav28
ra. aov ovv epyov iXOovra eiTreiv a 8el, SiaOeadai
ravra co? eTTi^dWei. elra iK€ivo<; \eyei
29 " Kpivco ^ ae aSixeiv." " ev aoi yevotro. iiroLr^aa
iyo) TO ifiov, el Se koI <rv to aov eTrolrjcra'i, o-^ei
avT6<;.'^ €(TTi yap ti<; KaKeivov kIv8vvo<;, /j.r] ae
XavOaverca,
r'. Hepl aBia(f)opLa<i.
1 To (7vvr)/j,/j,€vov a8id<popov' 17 Kpiai^ ri trepX avrov ovK d8td(f)opo^, d\)C r) iincrT'^^r] rj So^a fj dirdTrj. ovT<a<; ro ^r/v dBid(f)opov, r) 'X^pfjai'; ovk
2 dBid(j)opo<;. ixrj ttot ovv, orav eiTrrj ri<; vp,tv
dSca(f>op€iv KaX ravra, dfji,e\ei<i yivecrde, fi-qB' orav el<i eirLfiekeLav Ti<i u/xa? rrapaKaXfj, TaTreivol
3 Kal Ta<; vXa<; TedavfiaKore';. koXov Se Kal to
elSivai TTjv avTov TrapacTKevrjv Kal Svvafiiv, 'iv iv
ol<i fiT) Trapea-Kevacrai, rjcrvx^civ ayrj<i /mtjS dyavaKrfj<i,
€c Tive<; dXXoi irXeiov aov e^ovaiv iv
4 iKcivoL'i. KaX yap av iv avXXoyia^ol<; irXeiov
d^ia}aei<; aeavrov ep^etv Kav dyavaKT&aiv eVi
TOVTQ), TrapapLvdrjar) avTOVf " iyo) efuudov, vpsls
* Blass: Kpivu S, 246
BOOK II. V. 27-vi. 4 one else go on a voyage, someone else die, someone
else be condemned ? For it is impossible in such a body as ours, in this universe that envelops us, among these fellow-creatures of ours, that such
things should not happen, some to one man and some to another. It is your task, therefore, to step
forward and say what you should, to arrange these
matters as is fitting. Then the judge says, " I adjudge you guilty." I reply, ''May it be well
with you. I have done my part ; and it is for you
to see whether you have done yours." For the
judge too runs a risk, do not forget that.
CHAPTER VI
Of indifference in things
The hypothetical syllogism in itself is a matter of
indifference ; yet the judgement about it is not
indifferent, but is either knowledge, or opinion, or
delusion. In like manner, although life is a matter
of indifference, the use which you make of it is not
a matter of indifference. Therefore, when someone
tells you, " These things also are indifferent," do not
become careless, and when someone exhorts you to be careful, do not become abject and overawed by
material things. It is good also to know one's own
training and capacity, so that where you have had
no training you may keep quiet and not be annoyed
if some other persons outshine you in those matters.
For you in your turn will expect to outshine them
in syllogisms, and if they are annoyed at that, vou
will console them by saying, " I have learned this,
247
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
5
8' ou." ovTa><; kuI, ottov Tivb<; %yoeia rpL^rj^, fxr] ^rjTei TO a7r' avrrj^ ^ Trepiyivo/xevov, dW eKeivov
fiev irapa-xjoipei Tol<i 7repcT€rpififxevoi<;, aol S" dpKeiTco TO evaradeiv.
6 ""ATTcXde Koi ciaTracrat rhv Seiva.' " dcnrd-
^ofiai. ^ TTW? ; Of Ta7reti'ft)9. aA,A. e^eK\€icrdr](;"
^ " 8id 6vpiho<i 'yap ovk epadov
elcjepx^adav orav Se KeKkeipbevqv evpco rr}v
dvpav, dvajKr} fi r) d7ro')(^copP]aai rj hid, rrj^
7 6vpi8o<> elcreXdetv." " dWd koI \d\r)aov avro)"
8 "XaXw." " TLvarpoTTOv''; " ovraTTeivo)^" "aX,V
OVK €7r6TU^e?." prj yap aov Tovro to epyov rjv;
aW' eKeivov. tl ovv dvTiTroifj tov dWoTpiov;
del p.ep,vr]p,evo<i 6 tl aov Kal tl dWoTptov ov
9 Tapa')(9i](Ty. Bid tovto KaXa)<; 6 l^pvanrTTO^
Xiyei OTC " /ie;T^/9t? dv dSrjXd poi y Ta e^r]<;, del
Tcov €U(f)vea'Tepo}v e^ofJiaL 7rpo<i to Tvy^dveiv
Tcov KUTa <f)vaiv' awTO? yap fi 6 ^eo? eTTOirjcrev 10 TOVTwv eKXeKTLKOv, el Be ye rjBeLV oti vocrelv fioi KaOeipapTac vvv, Kal oypfxwv dv eV ayTO* Kai
yap 6 TTou?, el <^peva^ ^^X^^> ^PH^^ ^^ ^^^^ "''O TrrfkovadaL.^^
11 'ETret Tot Ttvo? eveKa yivovTut o-Ta%u€9 ; ovx
iva Kal ^TjpavdaxTCv ; dXkd ^tjpaivovTai puev, ov)(^
iva Be Kal Bepcadaxriv ; ov yap diroXvTot, yivov12
Tac. el ovv a'laOrjcnv elxov, ev-x^ecrffai avTovf
^ Elter : anh rrjs xp*^«s S. * Added by Schenkl.
• Schenkl : 4^€K\ei<Tdr)v S.
^ Com^Sire Stoic. Vet. Fragm. III. 46, frag. 191. Von Arnim
thinks that only the last few words are a literal quotation
from Chrysippus.
248
BOOK II. VI. 4-12
and you have not.' So also in a case wii-'^re some
acquired skill is needed, do not seek that which
only practice can give, but leave that to those who
have acquired the knack, and be content yourself to remain steadfast. " Go and salute so-and-so." " I salute him." " How ? " " In no abject spirit." " But the door was shut in your face." " Yes, for I have not
learned how to crawl in at the window ; but when
I find the door closed, I must either go away or crawl in at the window." " But go and do speak
to him." "I do so speak." "In what manner ."^
"
" In no abject spirit." " But you did not get what
you wanted." Surely that was not your business, was it? Nay, it was his. VV'hy, then, lay claim to that which is another's ? If you always bear in
mind what is your own and what is another's, you
will never be disturbed. Therefore Chrysippusi
well says, " As long as the consequences are not
clear to me, I cleave ever to what is better adapted
to secure those things that are in accordance with
nature ; for God himself has created me with the
faculty of choosing things. But if I really knew
that it was ordained for me to be ill at this present
moment, I would even seek illness : for the foot
also, if it had a mind, would seek to be covered with
mud." ^ For example, why do heads of grain grow.^ Is it net that they may also become dry r But when
they become dry, is it not that they may also be
harvested } Since they do not grow for themselves
alone. If, therefore, they had feeling, ought they
* That is, if the owner of it found it necessary to step into the mud ; c;. II. 5, 24. VOL. I. K ^^^
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
eSei, iva /mtj depicrduxTiv firjSeTroTe ; rovro Se Karapa iarlv eVl (rra^vfov to /jLijSeTroTe 6epi13
aOf]i>ai. ovTCi)^ Xare on koX itr' avdpaivwv
Karapa eari to fir) airodavelv ojuoiov rw fXTj 14 TreTTavBrjvai, p-r) depiaOrivai. rip.ei<; 8' eTreiSr) oi avToi ecrp-ev, ap,a p,€v ou<; Bel depKrdrjvat, a/xa 8e Kai avTM TOVTO) 7TapaKo\ov6ovvT€<; on depi^op-eda,
8ia tovto ayavaKToup,€v. ovre 'yap ccrp,ev TLve<i i(Tfi€P ovre pL€fi€\eTJjKap.€i> to, avdpwmKa
15 £09 ItnTiKoX ra iiririKd. aXka y^pvadvra^ p,€v
irateiv p,eX\cov top iroXep^iov, iireihrj Trj<i ad\-
7riyyo<i rjKovaev dvaKaXovarj^, dpea-^ev' ovTa)<i
irpovpyiairepov eBo^ev avTU) to tov crTpaT>iyov
16 7rp6(TTayp.a r) to iStov iroceiv rjpboyv 8' ovhei'i deXei ovBe rr}? dvdyKrj^ KaXovar)^ evXvro)^
vTraKovaai avTTJ, dWa K\dovTe<i kuI arevovTa
7rdcr^op,€v a Trda-^^^op^ev kuI irepicrTdcreL^ avTO.
17 fcaXovvTc^. iTdla^ TTepiardaei^, dvOpwrre ; el TrepLcndaei'i Xeyec<; Ta TrepieaTrjKora, irdvTa
irepiaTdcrei'i etaLv el h o)? Bva/coXa /caXet?,
TToiav BvoKoXiav e-)(ei to yev6p.evov (pOapr/vai ; 18 TO Be (^Oelpov rj p^d^aipd iaTiv r) TpO)(6<i rj ddXacrcra rj Kepap,l<i r) Tvpavvo<i. tL aoi p,eXei,
TTCia oBm KaTaBfi<i els "AlBov ; Xcrai irdaai elcriv. 19 et Be OeXea dxovaai TaXrjOrj, avvTop.(OTepa rjv
irep^TTei o Tvpavvo<;. ovBeiroT ovBel<; Tvpavvos e^
p.r]aip Tcpa eacpa^ep, irvpeTos Be Kal eviavTw
rroXXdKi<;. yfrocpo'i earl TrdvTa Tavra Kal «:o/i7ro9 KevMP 6pop,dTO)p.
^ Xenophon, Cyropaedeia, IV. 1, 3.
* i.e., the rack. 250
BOOK II. VI. 12-19
to pray that they should never at all be harvested ? But never to be harvested at all is a curse for heads
of grain. In like manner I would have you knowthat
in the case of men as well it is a curse never
to die ; it is like never growing ripe, never being
harvested. But, since we are ourselves those who
must both be harvested and also be aware of the
very fact that we are being harvested, we are angry on that account For we neither know who we are, nor have we studied what belongs to man, as horsemen
study what belongs to horses. But Chrysantas,
when he was on the point of striking the foe,
refrained because he heard the bugle sounding the
recall ; ^ it seemed so much more profitable to him
to do the bidding of his general than to follow his own inclination. Yet no one of us is willing, even when necessity calls, to obey her readily, but what
we suffer we suffer with fears and groans, and call it "circumstances." What do you mean by "circumstances,"
man ? If you call " circumstances " your
surroundings, all things are "circumstances" ; but if you use the word of hardships, what hardship is in- volved when that whicli has come into being is destroyed ? The instrument of destruction is a sword, or a wheel,^ or the sea, or a tile, or a tyrant.
VVhat concern is it to you by what road you descend
to the House of Hades .' They are all equal. ^ But
if you care to hear the truth, the road by which the
tyrant sends you is the shorter. No tyrant ever took six months to cut a man's throat, but a fever
often takes more than a year. All these things are a mere noise and a vaunting of empty names.
' A popular saying variously ascribed to Anaxagoras,
Aristippus, Diogenes, and others. 251
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
20 " T^ Ke<f)a\y Kivhweva eirl ^aicrapot^^ iya> 5' ov KLvBvvevo), o<? oIkco €v NtKOTToXei, oTTov aeicrfiol TOcrovroL ; av h' avro<i oTav 8icnrX€T)<i top* ASpiav,
21 Tt Kiv8vv€vei<; ; ov rfj K6(f)a\7] ; " aWa Koi rfj
VTToXTJyjrei KivSvvevco.^ T^ arj ; TTfti? ; Tt9 yap ae dvayKaaai hvvarai inroXa^elv tl wv ov ^eXet? ; aWa T^ aWoTpLo, ; kul Troto? iari klvSvvo^ <70<f 22 dX\.ov<; to, yjrevBr) v-rroXa^elv ; " aX>C i^opiadij' vac KivSvvevco." ri eariv e^opiaOrjvai ; aX-
\a')(pv elvai rj iv 'VoofiTj ; " pal.'* Tt ovv ; " av el<i Vvapa 7re/j,<pd(b ; " av a-oi iroifj, a-rrekevcrrj' el he prj, e%et9 ttov avrl Vvdpcov dTT€\dr)<i, ottov
Ko.Keivo'i iXevaerai, dv re 6eXr} dv re p.y'], 6 23 irepLTTOiv ere et? Vvapa. tv Xoittov &>? eVi fxeydXa
dvep-)(r) ; puKporepd eari t% irapacTKevT)^, Iv
elirr] veo<; ev(f)vr)<; on " ovk Tjv Toaovrov rotrovrcov
fiev dictjKoevat, roaavra he yeypa<^evai, roaovrw
he ypovo) irapaKeKaOiKevai yepovTL<p ov iroXXov
24 d^ifp." ixovov eKeivrj<i rf;? hiaipiaeco^ p.e/xvrjao,
Kad' fjv hiopl^eTai rd ad Kal ov rd ad. /x»; ttot' 25 dvTnroit]arj rivo<i tmv dXXoTplojv. ^r/fia koI (f)v- XaKt) roTTO^i earIV eKurepov, o p,ev vyjnjXo^, 6 he
raireivo'i' rj 7rpoaLpeai<; h larj, av larjv avri-jv ev^
eKarepw <t)vXd^ai Be>^r]<;, hvvarat <f>vXa-)(dfjvai. 26 Kal TOT* eaop-eOa l^rfKwTaX ^a>KpdT0v<{, OTav iv
27 ^vXaxfj hvvcopeda iraidva^ ypd<f)€iv. P'^XP'' ^^ vvv ft)9 e^opev, opa el r)vea^opie6* dv iv rfj (pvXaKrj
dXXov rivo^i rjp,iv XeyovTO<i " deXei^ dvayva>
^ Supplied by Schweighauser.
^ Gyara or Gyaros was a little island east of Attica, used
as a place of banishmeut in the early empire. Compare
I. 25, 19 f., etc. 252
BOOK II. VI. 20-27
" I run the risk of my life in Caesar's presence."
But do I not run a risk by living in N'icopolis, where
there are so many earthquakes? And what risk do
you yourself take when you cross the Adriatic ? Do you not risk your life .'' " But I also risk my
opinion at court." Your own opinion? How so?
Why, who can compel you to opine anything against
your will ? But do you mean some other man's
opinion ? And what kind of risk is it of yours that
others should entertain false opinions? " But I run
the risk of banishment." What is banishment? To
be somewhere else than in Rome? "Yes." What
then? "Suppose I am sent to Gyara." ^ If it is to your good, you will go ; if not, you have a place to which you may go instead of Gyara—where he too
will go, whether he will or no, who is sending you
to Gyara. Then why do you go up to Rome as though it were some great thing ? It amounts to
less than your preparation for it ; so that a young
man of parts may say, " It was not worth so much
to have listened to so many lectures, and to have
written so many exercises, and to have sat so long
at the side of a little old man, who was not worth
very much himself. ' Only remember that dis- tinction which is drawn between what is yours and
what is not yours. Never lay claim to anything tliat
is not your own. A platform and a prison is each a
place, the one high, and the other low ; but your
moral purpose can be kept the same, if you wish to keep it the same, in either place. And then we
shall be emulating Socrates, when we are able to
write paeans in prison. But considering what lias been our state hitherto, I wonder if we should have
endured it, had some one else said to us in prison,
253
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
aoL iratava^^' ; " ri fioi Trpdyfiara 7rap€)^ec<i ; ovk
olSa<; ra exoi'Ta fie Kaxd ; ev tovtoi<; yap fioi earIV —" ei' tlctiv ovv ; " dirodvrjcTKeiv fieXkco^
dvdpcoTTOi 8 dXXoc dddraToi eaopTUL
;
^. ITo)? fxavreureov ;
1 Ata TO aKaLpca fxavTeveadat, ttoKXoI KadrfKovra
2 TToWd TrapaXetTrofiev. t'l yap 6 p,dvTi<; Svvarai
irXeov Ihelv davdrov r) kcvSvvov fj voaov y\ o\&)?
3 TO)/' ToiovTCdv ; av ovv her] xivSwevaat virep tov
(piXov, av 8e Kai aTTodavelv virep avrov KadqKrj,
TTOV /jLoc Katpo<i eTL fiavTeveaOai ; ovk e')((ii tov
fidvTiv eao) tov elprjKOTa /not ttjv oualav tov
dyaOov Kal rov KaKOV, tov e^rjyrjp.evov to, arjfxela 4 dficpoTe'poov ; t'l ovv €ti ji^peiav e)((o t<ov airXdy-
')(v(ov T) Twv OLWvcJv / dXX' dve^Ofiai Xeyovro^
eKCLvov " av/x(f)epei crot ; tl ydp iari avficpepov
5 olBev ; tl icrriv dyaOov olSev ; fi.€fiddrjK€v coairep
TO, arjfxela tmv airXdy^vcov ovrax; a-r)/j,ela Tiva
dyadcdv Kal KaKcov ; el yap tovtcov olSev (Trj/xela,
Kal KaXcov Kal al(T')(^pa)v olBev Kai BiKaCoiv Kal
6 dBiKcoi'. dvdpwire, av /xoi Xiye rt arj/xaiveTai,
^(OT) rj 6dvaT0<;, irevia fj ttXovto^' irorepov 8e
^ The idea seems to be: We go to a diviner in order to
find out what acts to avoid if we would escape evils to
ourselves. But the things in life that are accounted our chief
ills are death, danger, illness, and the like. These evils one must sometimes, in self-respect, accept, and they are in fact, 254
BOOK II. VI. 27-vn. 6 "Would you like to have me read you paeans.-"
"Why bother me? Do you not know the trouble
that I am in ? What, is it possible for me in this condition ? " In what condition, then .' " I am
about to die." But will other men be immortal .''
CHAPTER VII
How should one employ Divination ? Because we employ divination when there is no
occasion for it, many of us neglect many of the
duties of life. For what can the diviner see that is of greater import than death,' or danger, or illness, or in general such things as these ? If, then, it becomes necessary for me to risk my life for my
friend, and if it becomes mv duty even to die for him, where do I find beyond that any occasion to employ divination ? Have I not within me the
diviner that has told me the true nature of good and
of evil, that has set forth tlie signs characteristic of
both of them ? What further use have I, then, ot
entrails, or of bitds.- But when he says, "It is expedient for you," do I accept it? Why, does
he know what is expedient ? Does he know what
is good ? Has he learned the signs characteristic of
things good and things evil, as he has the signs
characteristic of entrails ? For if he knows the
signs characteristic of these, he knows also those of
things honourable and base, and right and wrong.
Man, it is for you to tell me what is indicated by
signs—life 01 death, poverty or wealth ; but whether
not evils at all. Hence the petty things about which men
consult the diviner fall into insignificance.
»5S
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(rv/jL(f)epei Tavra rj davfi(f)opd iariv, aov /ieWtu
7 irvvOdveaOac ; 8id ri iv 'ypa/x/j,aTtKoi<i ov Xeyet? ; evOdh ovv, OTTov Travre? dvOpwTTOi TrXavcofieda
8 Kai irpof dWijiXov^ /xa^o/ie^a ; 8td rovro rj yvvT) KaXfo^ elirev t) 7r€fi-yfrac OeXovaa rrj
VpariWri i^wpicrfievj) to ttXoiov rS)v iTn/xrjuLoyv
Kara rov elirovra ore "W<j)acpr](r€Tai avra
Ao/iiTiav6<i" " ^IdXXov OeXo)," (^-qaiv, " tV
€Ketvo<i avra d(f)e\y]Tai rj Xv iyoi firj ne/xylra). 9 Tt ovv r)/j.d<i eVl to ovtco ^ avi'ey^co'i /xavreueadai
ayei ; rj SeiXca, to cfio^etaOai ra? eK^daei^. Bia
TOVTO KoXaKevo/Liev tol.? ixdvrei^' " KXijpovofirjau),
Kvpie, Tov TTUTepa ; " " IhwfJiev' eTre/cdvaMfxeOa.^^
"vat, Kupce, Q)^.rj tv-)(i^ deXei." ecr dv^ etirr}
*' KXt]povop,y'](xei<;" to? Trap' avrov ttjv KXrjpovo/xiav
et\7;(/)0T69 ev')(^apt<7Tov^ev avTO). 8id tovto ku10
Kclvot XoLTTov ifiTTac^^ova iv rj/Liiv. Ti ovv ; Bel Bi-ya
6pe^€a><; ep)(^6crdai koI eV/cXt'creo)*?, cb? 6 6Bonr6po<i
TTVvOdveTai irapd tov d7ravT/](TavT0<i, rrorepa rSiv
oBwv 4>ep6i, ovK e^d^v ope^iv Trpo? to ^ ttjv Be^idv
fidXXov (f)€p€iv r) Trji> dpLCTTepdv ov jdp toutcov
11 Tivd direXOelv OeXei dX\d ttjv (fyepovaav. outw?
eBei Kal eVi tov Oeov epx^eaOai, d><i oBr/jov, cb? roh
6(f)6aX,uo2<; ')^pco/u.eOa, ov irapaKaXovvTe^i avrov^
Lva rd TOiavTa pidXXov vpuv BeiKviKoaiv, dXX ola
evBeiKvvvTai tovtwv to.? (pavTaaia^ Bexop-evoi.
12 vvv Be Tpe/j.ovT€<; tov opviOdpiov KpaTovp.ev /cat
* Schenkl : towt * * S. * Kronenberg : iirau S.
* Supplied by Upton.
^ That is, on a subject about which you do not profess to know anything.
256
BOOK II. VII. 6-12
these things are expedient or inexpedient, am I going
to ask of you ? Why don't you speak on points
of grammar ? ^ Well then, on this matter, in which
we mortals are all astray and in conflict with one
another, you do speak ? Wherefore, that was an
admirable answer which the woman gave who wished
to send a boatload of supplies to Gratilla after she
had been exiled. To a man who said, " Domitian
will confiscate them," she replies, " I should rather
have him confiscate them than myself fail to send
them."
VV'hat, then, induces us to employ divination so constantly ? Gswardice, fear of the consequences.
This is why we flatter the diviners, saying : " Master,
shall I inherit my father's property ? " " Let us see ; let us offer a sacrifice about that matter." "Yes,
master, as fortune wills." Then if the diviner says, " You will inherit the property," we thank him as though we had received the inheritance from him.
That is why they in their turn go on making mock
of us. Well, what then? We ought to go to them
without either desire or aversion, just as the wayfarer
asks the man who meets him which of two roads
leads to his destination, without any desire to have
the right-hand road lead there any more than the
left-hand road ; for he does not care to travel one
particular road of the two, but merely the one that
leads to his destination. So also we ought to go to God as a guide, making use of Him as we make use
of our eyes ; we do not call upon them to show us such-and-such things by preference, but we accept
the impressions of precisely such things as they
reveal to us. But as it is, we tremble before the
bird-augur, lay hold upon him, and appealing to him
257
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
0)9^ Oeov iiriKaXovfievoi heo/xeda avrov' " Kvpte,
13 iXerjaov eTTLTpe^ov fxoi i^eXOelv." dvSpdiroBov,
aXXo yap ti 6eXeL<; rj to d/xeivov ; dXko ovv tc
14 ap-eivov rj to t&) deoi hoKovv ; rl to octov em aol
hia<^delpei<i tov Kpirrjv, 7rapdyei<; tov avfifiouXov ;
t) . Tt9 ovaia tov dyadov ;
1 O aeo9 OD(f)eXi/j,o<;' dXXa kuI TayaObi' Q)(f)eXip,ov, ecK0<i ovv, OTTOV T] ovata tov Oeov, eKel elvai koI
2 Trjv TOV dyadov. Tt? ovv ovaia deov ; o-dp^ ; fxr) yivoiTO. dypo<i ; firj yivoiTo. (f)yp.rj ; firj yevoiTO.
3 vov<;, €7naTi]fiy], X6yo<; 6p06<i. ivTavOa tolvvv
aTrXco? ^T^Tet ttjv ovalav tov dyadov. iirei tol
/XT} Ti avTTjv iv (f)VTa) ^r)rei<; ; ov. firj tl iv
dXoya ; ov. iv XoyiKO) ovv ^r/TMv tc eTi d\Xa)(ov
^TjTeh rj iv TTJ TTapaXXayfj Trj Trpo? Ta dXoya ; 4 Ta (fiVTa oi/Se ^avTacrtaa ^prjaTiKu itniv. hid
TOVTO ov Xiyei^ e7r' avT&v to dyadov. Belrai
5 ovv TO dyadov ^p^^cre&j? <f>avTaaiO)v. dpd ye
fi6vr]<; ; el yap /j,6vt)<;, Xeye Kal iv Tot? dXXoi<;
fft)ot9 Ta dyadd elvat Kal evSacfioviav koI KaKo6
Bacfiovcav. vvv 5' ov Xey€i<; Kal KaXoi)^ iroieW el
Elter : -rhv 8. 258
BOOK II. VII. i2-vin. 6
as if he were a god, we beg of him, saying : " Master,
have mercy ; grant that I come off safe." You slave ! What, do you want anything but what is best for
you f Is anything else best for you than what pleases
God ? Why do you do all that in you lies to corrupt
your judge, to mislead your counsellor?
CHAPTER VIII
fVhat is the true nature of the good ?
God is helpful ; but the good also is helpful. It would seem, therefore, that the true nature of the
good will be found to be where we find that of God
to be. What, then, is the true nature of God ? Flesh ? Far from it 1 Land ? Far from it ! Fame ? Far from it ! It is intelligence, knowledge, right
reason. Here, therefore, and only here, shall you
seek the true nature of the good. Surely you do
not seek it at all in a plant, do you ? \o. Nor in an irrational creature ? No. If, then, you seek it in that which is rational, why do you keep on seeking
it somewhere else than in that which differentiates
the rational from the irrational .' Plants are in- capable of dealing even with external impressions
;
for that reason you do not speak of the " good " in
referring to them. The good requires, therefore, the
faculty of using external impressions. Can that be
all that it requires ? For, if that be all, then you
must assert that things good, and happiness and
unhappiness, are to be found in the other animals as well as in man. But, as a matter of fact, you do not
so assert, and you are right ; for even if they have in
a59
ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
rfap Kol TO, fid\i<rra y^pijcriv ^avraaioiv e%€f,
aWa irapaKoXovOrjaiv je rfj •^prjaei tcov (pavraaiSiv
ovK €')(€i. Koi eiKOTW^' vTrrjpeTLKa yap
7 yeyovev aWoi^, ovk avTU irpor^yovp.eva. 6 ovo^
eirei yeyovev fi7] tc TTpOTjyov/jLevo)^ ; ov' aX\! on
VMTOv ')(^peiav et'X^ofiev ^aaTci^eiv ri Svvafievov.
aWa vrj Aca koX 7r€pnrarovvTO<i avrov j^pelav
etx^fiei'' 8ia rovro 7rpoaeiXrj<p€ koI to 'yP'tjo^Oai
^avTaalaL<i' aXXwi yap TrepiTrarelv ovk ehwaro.
8 Ka\ XoiTTOv avTou ttov ireTravTai, el he xal avro^
TTOV 7rpoaeiXy](f)ei TrapaKoXovOrjaiv ^ rfi -^ptjcrei
Twv <f)avTacrici)i', koX hrjXov on Kara \6yov ovxer av r}p,lv vTrereTUKTO ovSe Ta<; j^peia'i TavTa<i
naptl^ev, aXX.' r/v av icro? rjfilv Kal Ofxoio<;. 9 Ov OeXei^i ovv exel i^rj-relv rrjv ovcriav rov
ayaQov, ov prj TTap6vT0<; iir ovBevb^ tcov aXXcov
10 OeXeif Xeyeiv to dyadov ; " tl^ ovv; ovk ean
6eo)v epya Ka^elva ;" eaTtv, dXX" ov Trporjyov11
p,tva ou8e fiept] Oewv. ai) Se Trporjyou/jLevov el, av diTocriraap-a el tov Oeov' €')(eL^ ti ev aeai'Tw
pepo<i eK(:ivov. tl ovv dyvoelt aov tijv avyye12
veLav ; tL ovk olSa^, iroOev eXr)Xv6a<; ; ov 6eXeL<;
fjbeiMvrjaBai, OTav eadir)'^, rt? wv iaOUis Kal -riva Tpe(^eL^ ; OTav auvovaia XPV> '^'''» ^^ XPV >' OTav
OfiiXia ; OTav yvpvdtr), OTav BiaXeyrj, ouk ol8a<i
^ Schenkl: TrapaKoXovdr] S.
* Upton : €1 S.
* That is, things that are an end in themselves, like man,
in the cliaracteristic Stoic anthropoceutric view. Cf. also II.
10, 3.
* That is, the ass went no further in the development of
its faculties. 260
BOOK II. VIII. 6-12
the highest degree the faculty of using external
impressions, still they do not have the faculty of
understanding, at all events, their use of the external
impressions. And with good reason ; for tliey are bom to serve others, and are not themselves of
primary importance.* The ass, for example, is not
born to be of primary importance, is it.' No; but
because we had need of a back that was able to carry something. But, by Zeus, we had need that
it should be able also to walk around ; therefore it has further received the faculty of using external
impressions ; for otherwise it would not be able to walk around. And at about that stage there was
an end.2 But if it, like man, had someiiow received
the faculty of understanding the use of its external
impressions, it is also clear that consequently it would no longer be subject to us, nor would it be performing
these services, but would be our equal and our peer.
Will you not, therefore, seek the true nature of
the good in that quality the lack of which in all creatures other than man prevents you from using
the term "good" of any of these? "But what
then ? Are not those creatures also works of God ? " They are, but they are not of primary importance, nor
portions of Divinity. But you are a being of primary
importance ; you are a fragment of God ; you have
within you a part of Him. Whv, then, are you
ignorant of your own kinship? Why do you not
know the source from which you have sprung ? Will
you not bear in mind, whenever you eat, who you
are that eat, and whom you are nourishing? Whenever
you indulge in intercourse with women, who
you are that do this? Whenever you mix in society,
whenever you take physical exercise, whenever you
s6i
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
OTt Oeov T/?e^et9, Oeov yvfivd^ei^; ; deov Tr€pt4>ip€i<;, 13 TaXa?, Kal dyi^oeif;. 8oKei<; fie Xeyetv dpyvpovv
Tiva rj ')(^pv(Tovv e^coOev ; iv cravrw (fiipea ainov
Kcu /xoXuvcov ouK aladdvT} cLKaOdproi^ fiev Bia14
vorjfxaai, f)VTTapai<; Se irpd^ecn. kcu dydX/xuTO^
fiev Tov Oeov Trapovro'i ovk av ToX/j.rjcrai'i ti tovTcov
iroielv mv iroiei^. avrov Se rov Oeov irap6vT0<i
ecrwOev Kal ecf>op(i)vro^ Trdvra kul eiraKov0VT0<i
OVK al(T')(yvr] ravra ivOv/J.ovfievo<i Kal irotoyv,
dvaiadrjTe t?)? avrov 0u<Te&)<; Kal deo-)(o\a>Te ; 16 AotTTOV r}fiel<i Tt (po^ovfieda iK7re/j,TruvT€<; veov eVt riva^ 7rpd^€i<; eV t% (T')(o\rj^, jxi) dWoi<i
Troci]<TT) Tt, /XT) dXX,co<; (f)dyr}, firj aW&xj crvvovaid(Tr),
/iir) TaTTeivioarj avrov paKrj irepiTeOevra,^
16 fjLT} eirdp)] ^ K0/j,\frd l/xdria ; ovto<; ovk olBev avrov deov, ovro<i ovk ol8ev, fiera rivo<i direpyerai.
aW' dveyop.e9a \eyovro<i " avrov ae
17 rjOeXov e')(etv " ; eVei rov Oeov ovk e^ei^ ; elr
18 ciXXov rivd ^r^rel? eKelvov e\^cov ; r) dXXa aoi
epei eKeLi'0<; rj ravra ; dXX el uev ro ayaX/xa 779 TO ^eiBiov, ri 'AOrjvd rj 6 Zeixi, ifxe/j-vrja-o av Kal
aavrov Kal rov re^^lrov Kal et riva aXaOi^aiv
et^e?, errecpo) dv firjSev dvd^iov iroielv rov Karaa-Kevdaavro<;
firjBe aeavrov, firjh' iv dirpeTrel
19 a^^jj/xari (f)aiveaOai rot<i opcjcrr vvv 8e ere on 6 Zeu? TreTroiT)Kev, 8td rovro dfieXel<; olov rtva
^ Wolf: irfpiriQivra S. ^ Reiske: iirdyrii S.
^ Referring to the chryselephantine statues at Athens and
at Olynipia, upon which the fame of Pheidias principally
rested. The statue of Athena held a Nike in the out- stretched right hand; cA § 20 below. 262
BOOK II. VIII. 12-19
converse, do you not know that you are nourishing
God, exercising God ? You are bearing God about
with you, you poor wretch, and know it not I Do
you suppose I am speaking of some external God,
made of silver or gold ? It is within yourself that
you bear Him, and do not perceive that you are
defiling Him with impure thoughts and filthy actions. Yet in the presence of even an image of God you
would not dare to do anything of the things you are now doing. But when God Himself is present witiiin you, seeing and hearing everything, are you not
ashamed to be thinking and doing such things as
these, O insensible of your own nature, and object
of God's wrath I Again, when we send a young man forth from the
school to sundry activities, why are we afraid that
he will do something amiss—eat amiss, have inter- course with women amiss, be abased if dressed in rags or conceited if he has on fine clothes ? Tiiis fellow
does not know the God within him, this fellow does
not know the companion with whom he is setting
forth Nay, can we allow him to say, " O God,
would that I had Tliee here " ? Have you not God
there, where you are? And when you have Him, do
you seek for someone else ? Or will He have other
commands for you than these ? Nay, if you were a
statue of Pheidias, his Athena or his Zeus,^ you
would have remembered both yourself and your
artificer, and if you had any power of perception
you would have tried to do notiiing unworthy of
him that had fashioned you, nor of yourself, and you
would have tried not to appear in an unbecoming
attitude before tiie eyes of men ; but as it is, because
Zeus has made you, do you on that account not care 363
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Set^et? aeavrov ; koI tL 6 Te^i'tr?;? tw T€)(ViTr)
ofjLoio<; fj TO KaracTKevacrfia t5> KUTaaKevdafiaTi
;
20 Koi iroiov epyov tcxvltov €vdv<; e^^et Ta<; 8vvdfi€i,<;
iv eavro), a? ifKJyaivet 8id tt}? Karaa-Kevrj^; ; ov^l
Xi6o<i eaTiv T) )(^a\.KO^ rj )(^pv(TG<i rj eXec^a?/ xal f/ ^Adrjvd r) ^eiBiov dira^ eKreivaaa rrjv y/ipa koX
Tr]v N1AC771/ eV avTr]<; Se^a/xevT] earrjKeu oyxft)?
oXfp T& alSivi, TO, Be tov deov Kivovfieva, efi- 21 iTvoa, 'X^pijaTiKa (pavTacrcMv, SoKifiaa-TiKa. tovtov
rod 8r]/j.i,ovpyov KUTaaKevaa/xa tov Karaia^vvei^
axiro ; ti 8' ; ort ov fiovov ae KaTecrKevaaev,
a\Xd KaX aol fiovm iTriaTevcrev Ka] irapciKaTeOero,
22 ov8e TOVTOV fiefivijaij, dWd /cat KaTai(r')(^vv€i<;
Ttjv iiriTpoTnqv ; el Be aoi optpavov Tiva 6 ^eo?
23 irapedeTO, ovTrot av avTOV r)iJ,iXei<; ; irapaBeBcoKe aoc aeavTov koi Xeyei " ovk e2;^oy dWov ttkttorepov
(TOV tovtov [xoi (f)vXaaae tolovtov olo<;
iTe(f)VK€V, alBt]/j,ova, TTiaTOV, vy^rjXov, dxuTdttXtjktov,
diradr), drdpax^ov. ' etTU aii ov
(f)vXd(Taei<i; 24 " 'AW ipovaiv' ' iroOev rj/xiv outo? 6(f)pvv
evrivo')(ev kcli crepvoTrpoatoTrei ;
' ovirco Kar
d^iav. eTi yap ov dappSi ol? e/j-aSov kuI
avyKaTedep^r^v ert tvjv dadeveiav ttjv ipavTov
25 (f)o0ovpai. eirel toi ac^ere pie Oappijcrai koi totc
oyjreaOe ^Xep^/xa oiov Bel xal crx^p,a olov Bel, tots
^ See the note on p. 262. 264
BOOK 11. VIII, 19-25
what manner of person you show yourself to be ? And yet what comparison is there between the one
artificer and the other, or between the one work of
art and the other ? And what work of an artificer has forthwith within itself the faculties which its workmanship discloses ? Is it not mere stone, or
bronze, or gold, or ivory? And the Athena of
Pheidias, when once it had stretched out its hand
and received the Nike^ upon it, stands in this attitude
for all time to come ; but the works of God are capable of movement, have the breath of life, can make use of external impressions, and pass judgement
upon them. Do you dishonour tlie workmanship
of this Craftsmm, when you are yourself that
workmanship ? Nay more, do you go so far as to forget, not only that He fashioned you, but also
that He entrusted and committed you to yourself
alone, and moreover, by forgetting, do you dis- honour your trust? Yet if God had committed some orphan to your care, would you so neglect
Him? He has delivered your own self into your
keeping, saying, " I had no one more faithful tiian you ; keep this man for me unchanged from the char- acter with which nature endowed him —reverent,
faithful, high-minded, undismayed, unimpassioned,
unperturbed." After that do you fail so to keep
him ? " But men will say, ' Where do you suppose our
friend here got his proud look and his solemn
countenance ?
' " Ah, but my bearing is not yet what
it should be ! For I still lack confidence in what I have learned and agreed to ; I am still afraid of my
own weakness. Just let me gain confidence and
then you will see the right look in my eye and the
265
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
vfMv Sei^Q) TO dyaXfMa, orav TeXeioidfj, orav
26 <TTi\7rv(vOfj. Tt SoKelre ; 6<f)pvv ; fit) yevoiro.
fiT) yap 6 Zeu? 6 ev \)\vfj,7rla 6(f)pvv apecriraicev ; aWa ireiri'i'yev avTOv to /SXe/x/xa, olov Bet elvai
roV ipOVVTO<i
01) yap efxov TraXivdyperov ovB airaTifKov.
27 TOiovTOv vfuv Sei^co ifiavrov, ttkttqv, alhrjpova,
28 yevvalov, drdpa^ov. pbrj rt ovv dddvarov, dyqpcov,
pi] Ti dvocrov ; aX,X,' dirodvirjcrKovTa deicos, vocrovvra OeLw^. ravra e;^ft), TauTa 8vvap,ai'
29 TO, S' dWa ovT* e^ft) oi;Te 8vvap,ai. hei^oi vp,tv
vevpa (jii\o(T6(f)ov' irola vevpa ; ope^iv dvanoTeVKTOV,
eKKklCTLV aTTepLTTTCOTOV, OpprjV KuO I'jKOVaav,
irpoOeaiv €TTip,€\rj, avyKardOeaiv d'7rp6m(>i- Tov. ravTa oyjreaOe.
&. "Oti ov 8vvdp,€vo(, Trjv dvdpooTTOV iirayyeXiav
TrXrjpoiyaai rrjv (f}i\o(T6(pov 7rpocr\ap,^dvop,ev
1 OvK eaTi TO rv)(ov avro p^ovov dvOpdiirou iir2
ayyeXiav TrXr^paxrai, rl yap eajiv dvOp(oTro<; ; ZwOV, (f>T}(7L, XoyiKOV, OptJTOV. ^vOvf ev TV)
XoyiKO) Tivfov )(^(op loopeda ; Twv drjpiwv. Kai.
TLVcov dXXcov ; Twv irpo^drwv Kai rSyv opoLwv.
3 "Opa ovv prj ri irnx; &)<? Orjpiov 7rot,rjar}<i- eu Be pt],
dTTooXeaa^ rbv dv9pw-nov, ovk eirXripwaa'i rr)v
^ Homer, Iliad, I. 526, Bryant's translation.
'^ That is, what a person or a thing promises or is expected
to perform. In rendering eVay^eAla the same word has been
retained throughout the chapter, even in unusual collocations,
so as to preserve clearly the point of the analogy.
266
BOOK II. VIII. 25-ix. 3 right bearing ; then, when the statue is finished and
polished, I will show it to you. What do you think
of it ? A lofty air, say you ? Heaven forbid ! For
the Zeus at Olympia does not show a proud look,
does he ? No, but his gaze is steady, as befits one who is about to say.
No word of mine can be revoked or prove untrue.^ Of such character will I show myself to you—faithful,
reverent, noble, unperturbed. You do not mean, therefore,
immortal, or ageless, or exempt from disease ? No, but one who dies like a god, who bears disease
like a jiod. This is what I have ; this is what I can do; but all else I neither have nor can do. I will show you the sinews of a philosopher What do you
mean by sinews ? A desire that fails not of achievement,
an aversion proof against encountering what
it would avoid, an appropriate choice, a thoughtful
purpose, a well-considered assent. This is what you
shall see. CHAPTER IX
That although rve are unable to fulfil the profession of
a man, we adopt that of a philosopher
It is no simple task, this of fulfilling merely the
profession ^ of a man. For what is a man .' A rational,
mortal animal, someone says. To begin with, from
what are we distinguished by the rational element ? From the wild beasts. And from what else? From
sheep and the like. See to it, then, that you never
act like a wild beast ; if you do, you will have
destroyed the man in you, you have not fulfilled 267
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
eirayyekiav. opa ix'^ ri q><; irpo^aTov el Sk fit], 4 Kai ovrci}<i aTrcaXero o dvdpa>7ro<;. riva ovv
7roiovp,ev (W9 irpo^ara ; orav tT;? •yaarpo'i cvcku, orav Tcof alSolcov, orav el/cr}, orav pvirapoi'^, orav
aveTTKTTpeTrra)^, ttov aireKXivapev ; eVi ra 'irpo5
^o.ra. Ti aiTOikeaapev ; ro XoyiKov. orav /in;\;t-
/i&)<? Kol ^\a/3e/3C()9 KOI dv/bLlK(t)<i KaX MCTTIKMs,
6 TTOV uTreK\lva/x€i' ; eVt ra Srjpia. Xonrov ol fiev rjpcov fxeydXa Oijpia elaiv, oi he OqpiBia KaK0i]6ri
Kal p,iKpd, €({)' ^ MP eariv elTrelv " Xewv fie koI
7 (j)ay6T(i). ' Bia ttuvtcov Be tovtmv aTroXXvrai rj 8 Tov avOpcoTTou eirayyeXia. irore yap aw^erai
(Tvp-TreTrXeyp^eiov ; orav ttjv irrayyeXiav ttXijpcoarj,
axrre (T(OTi]pla avp^TreirXey/nevov earl to e'f aXr}d(t)v avpTreTrXe)(Oai. Trore 8i€^evypeioi> ; OTUV TT]v eirayyeXlav irXripuxTr). Trore avXoi,
9 TTore Xvpa, Trore 'imro<;, Trore kvwv ; ri ovv Oavpaa-Tov, el Kal av6pwTro<; (oaavroy^ p,v
10 (Tw^erai, (oaavr(t)<; b aTroXXvrai ; av^ei B eKaarov /cat crw^ei ra KardXXrjXa epya' rov reKrova rd reKrovi/cd, rov ypauparifcov rd
ypap,pariKd, dv B) ediar] ypd(^€LV dypappdrwi,
di'dyKT) Kara<^Oeipeadai Kal aTTokXvadai rrji' 11 re^vrjv. ovtco^ rov pev al8r]p,ova aw^ei rd a^8)]-
p,ova epya, aTToXXvei Be rd ^ dvaiBi)' rov Be
1 Wolf: atp' S. « Wolf: rhv 8.
^ Referring to the proverb, " Let a lion devour me, and
nob a fox," ascribed to Aesop. Frov. 15 (Paroemiourap/ii
Gr'ieci, II. 230). As it is considered to be a greater mis- fortune to be killed by a mean and small animal than by
a great one, so malignant and petty people are more hateful than the strong and fierce. 268
BOOK II. IX. 3-1
1
your profession. See to it that you never act like a sheep; if you do, the man in you is destroyed in this way also. Well, when do we act like sheep .^ When
we act for the sake of the belly, or of our sex-organs,
or at random, or in a filthy fashion, or without due
consideration, to what level have we degenerated ? To the level of sheep. What have we destroyed .'' The reason. When we act pugnaciously, and injuriously,
and angrily, and rudely, to what level have
we degenerated ? To the level of the wild beasts.
Well, the fact is tiiat some of us are wild beasts of a
larger size, while others are little animals, malignant
and petty, which give us occasion to say, " Let it be
a lion that devours me ! " ^ By means of all these
actions the profession of a man is destroyed. For
when is a complex thing preserved ? When it fulfils its profession ; consequently, the salvation
of a complex thing is to be composed of parts that
are true. When is a discrete ^ thing preserved ? When it fulfils its profession. WHien are flutes, a
lyre, a horse, a dog preserved ? What is there to
be surprised at, then, if a man also is preserved in
the same way and in the same way destroyed?
Now deeds that correspond to his true nature
strengthen and preserve each particular man ; carj>entry does that for the carpenter, grammatical
studies for the grammarian. But if a man acquires
the habit of writing ungrammatically, his art must
necessarily be destroyed and perish. So modest
acts preserve the modest man, whereas immodest
acts destroy him ; and faithful acts preserve the
* A thing viewed as a separate entity existing /)«r se, not
as a mere component part of something else. 369
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
12 iricrTOV ra Trtora koI ra ivavrla d-TroWvei. kuI
Toi"? ivai'TLovf; vdXiv iirav^ei ra evavria' top
dvaicr^vvTov dvaLcry^vvTia,^ top ciTnarov dinaTia,^
TOP XotSopop XoiBopia, top opyiXop opyrj, top
^tkdpyvpop at dKardW-ijXoi Xi]'\lr€i<i Kal Soaei^,
13 Ata TOVTO TrapayyiXXovaip ol (f)iX6ao(f}Oi /jltj dpKcladat
fiopo) Ta> /xaOelp, dXXd kuI fieXeTrjp
14 TTpocrXap^dveip, elra daKyacp. ttoXXo) yap -^povo)
rd ipaPTta ttouIp eWiafxeOa koX Td<} vTroXrjyjreK;
TO? eiaPTiaf; ral<i 6pOai<i ^pT/o-rt/ta? eyop.ep. dp
ovp fXTj Ka\ Ta<i 6pOd<i -^pyjaTiKaii 7roii]a-(op,€P,
ovBep dXXo rj i^ijyrjral eaoixeda dXXorptwp
15 Boyfi-drcov. dpri yap Tt<? tj/xcop oii Bvparai
TexvoXoyrjaai irepl dya6S)P Kal KUKOiP ; oti t(op
OPTCop ra pep dyaOd, ra Be Kaxd, ra B aBia(f)opa'
dyadd pep ovp dperal Kal ra p^ere^opra rcop
dperwp' KUKa rd B' evapria' dBidcpopa Be
16 TrXovro<i, vyeia, Bo^a. elr dp pera^u Xeyoprcop
qp^wp yfr6(f)0<; pei^cop yeprjraL 7] ra>p Tvapoprwp rt?
17 KarayeXdar) rjpicop, e ^eirXdyr]pep . ttov earip,
<f)cX6ao(})e, eKetpa d eXeye^ ; irodep avra 'irpo(f)€pop€P0<i
eXeyef ,* otto t&p 'x^eiXayp avroOep. n ovp
dXXorpia /SorjOijpara poXvpeL<; ; ri kv0€V€1<; irepl
18 rd peyiara ; dXXo ydp iarip eo? et? rap.idop
diroOecxOai dprov<; Kal oIpop, dXXo icrrt, (payeip.
TO ^prvdep eTrecpd'], dpeBodi], pevpa eyepero, (TapKe<i,
* Supplied by Upton from his " codex." 270
I
BOOK II. IX. 11-18
faithful man while acts of the opposite character
destroy him. And again, acts of the opposite
character strengthen men of the opposite character
;
shamelessness strengthens the shameless man, faith- lessness the faithless, abuse the abusive, wrath the
wrathful, a disproportion between what he receives
and what he pays out the miserly.
That is why the philosophers admonish us not to be satisfied with merely learning, but to add thereto
practice also, and then training. For in the course
of years we have acquired the habit of doing the
opposite of what we learn and have in use opinions
which are the opposite of the correct ones. If, therefore, we do not also put in use the correct
opinions, we shall be nothing but the interpreters of other men's judgements. For who is there among
us here and now that cannot give a philosophical
discourse about good and evil .' It will run like
this : Of things that be, some are good, others evil,
and others indifFeient; now good things are virtues
and everything that partakes in the virtues ; evil are the opposite ; while indifferent are wealth,
health, reputation. Then, if we are interrupted in the midst of our speech by some unusually loud
noise, or if someone in the audience laughs at us, we are upset. Where, you philosopher, are the
things you are talking about? Where did vou get
what you were just saying? From your lips, and
that is all. W'hy, then, do you pollute the helpful
principles that are not your own ? Why do you
gamble about matters of the very utmost concern ? For to store away bread and wine in a pantrv is one
thing, and to eat them is another. What is eaten is digested, distributed, becomes sinews, flesh, bones,
271
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ocTTea, al/xa, evxpoia, evirvoia. ra a-jroKelfieva orav fiev deKri(Tr)<; gk "Trpo^^eipov Xa^oov Bel^ai
hvvaaai, arr^ avrwv 8e aoi 6(f)€\o<; ovBev el firj 19 P'^xpi' foO SoKelu OTi e;^ei9. rl yap Zia<^epei
TavTU i^rj-yeiaOai rj ra rcov krepoho^wv ; T€')(^vo\oy€c vvv KaOiaa^ ra {LiriKovpov koI Ta;^a
eKecvov '^prjcniKooTepov Te)(yo\oyi')<jei<i, ri ovv
ItTcoLKov Xeyet? aeavTov, ri i^a7raTa<; tou9
TToXXoi;?, Tt vTroKpivY) '\ovZaiov mv ' EXXt;^ ^;
20 ou;^ opa<;, ttco? eKaaro^ XeyeTai 'lou^aio?, ttw?
Su/309, 770)9 AtyUTTTtO? / Kul OTUV TIVO, ilTafJ,-
<f>OTepi^ovTa ihwfieu, eiMdafiep \iyetv " ovic ecrTiv 'Ioi/§at09, aW' vTTOKpiverai. ' otuv 3' avakd^r)
TO 7rdOo<; ro rov ^e^afifiivov koX -pprjfMevov, rore
21 Kal ecTTi Tw ovtl koI KaXeirat 'louSalo^. ouTco<i Kal rj/iiet'^ irapa^aTTTicrral,^ \6ya) fiev 'louSaiot,
epy(p h' aX\o ri, «cry/x7ra^et9 Trp6<; rov \6yov,
/xaxpav ttTTO rov ^^>}o"^af rovTOL<i a Xeyo/iev, i<f) 22 019 ci)9 etSoTe9 avrd eiraipofjitOa. ovrco^ ovSe rrjv
Tov dvdpcoTTOV eirayyekiav irXrjpctxrai hvvdfxevoi
TrpocrXafjb^dvo/jLev rrjv rov (piXoaoipov, rrjXiKouro
' Schenkl: lou5a7os Siv tWrivas S.
* irapaBairTiffToi Salmasius, perhaps correctly.
* It would appear (especially from the expression "counterfeit
'baptists'" below) that Epictetus is here speaking really
of the Christians, who were in his time not infrequently
confused with the Jews. (But it should be observed that
the text translated here -is an emendation, for the MS. says " the part of Greeks when you are a Jew," which may
possibly be defended on the understanding that, in the parlance of Epictetus, a Jew is one who does not follow reason as his sole guide.)
The sense of this much vexed passage I take to be : True
272
BOOK II. IX. 18-22
blood, a good complexion, easy breathing. What
is stored away you can readily take and show whenever
you please, but you get no good from it except
in so far as you are reputed to possess it. For how
much better is it to set forth these principles than
those of other schools of thought.'' Sit down now
and give a philosophical discourse upon the principles
of Epicurus, and perhaps you will discourse more
effectively than Epicurus himself. Why, then, do
you call yourself a Stoic, why do you deceive the
multitude, why do you act the part of a Jew,^ when
you are a Greek ? Do you not see in what sense men are severally called Jew, Syrian, or Egyptian ? For example, whenever we see a man halting
between two faiths, we are in the habit of saying, " He is not a Jew, he is only acting the part." But
when he adopts the attitude of mind of the man
who has been baptized and has made his choice,
then he both is a Jew in fact and is also called one. So we also are counterfeit " baptists," ostensibly
Jews, but in reality something else, not in sympathy
with our own reason, far from applying the principles
which we profess, yet priding ourselves upon them
as being men who know them. So, although we
are unable even to fulfil the profession of man, we
take on the additional profession of the philosopiier
Jews {i.e. Christians) are a very marked class of men because
of the rigorous consistency between their faith and their
practice. But there are some who for one reason or another
(possibly in order to avail themselves of the charity which
the Christians dispensed to the poor, as Schweighauser
suggests, —like the so-called "rice Christiaus") profess a
faith which they do not practise. It is this class, then,
which Epictetus has in mind when he bitterly calls himself and his pupils "counterfeit ' baptists.' " 273
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(popTLov, oLov el Tt? heKa \lTpa<f apai /xr] hvvdfxevos
TOP Tov Atapro<; \idov ^acnd^eiv ijdeXev.
I . H(t)(i UTTO ra)i> ovoficLTOiU ra KadrjKOvTa
ecTTLv evpicrKetv ;
1 ^K€yjrat Tt9 et. to irpoirov av6pw7ro<i, tovto S' €(TTiv ovSev e^f^v KvpicoTepov 7rpoaipecre(t)<;, dXXa
TavTT) Ta aWa viroTerwyixeva, avrrjv 8' dhov2
\evToi Kal dwiroraKTOv. a/coTrei ovv, tlvcov
Ke)(^(t)piaai Kara Xoyov. K€)(^(i)piaai drjpicov,
3 Ke'^ODpLcraL Trpo^drcop. eVl TOVTOi<i ttoXi't?;? el rov Koap-ov Kal /J,epo<; avrov, ou^ ei^ rayu vrrrjpeTiKtav,
dWd rSiV 7rpor}yovp.€VO)v' Trapa'<o\ov6riTiK0<;
yap el rfj 6eia ^loi/ctjaei Koi rov efT}? 4 eTTtkoyiaTiKOf;. Tt<? ovv eTrayyeXta ttoXltov ; p,r]8ev €)(eiv IHa (Tvp,(f)epov, irepl p,rjhevo^ jSovXevecOai
ft)? (tTToXvrov, dX^C uxnrep dv, el rj %6t/3
rj 6 TTov'} Xoyiap-ov el^^ov Kal TraptjKoXovt'ouv
rrj (f)V(TiKrj KaraaKevfj, ovherror dv dXXoi^
MpfMTjaav rj u)pe-)(dqaav rj eiTaveveyK6vre<; eirl to
6 oXov. 8td TOVTO KaXoi)^ Xeyovcriv oi ^lXoctoc^ol
OTi el Trporjhet o KaXo<f Kal dyaOo<; Ta eaop^eva,
avv^pyei dv Kai tw voaelv Kal t5) diroOvricrKeii' Kal TU) TnjpovaOat, alaOavop.evof ye, oti dirb t^?
' The huge one with which he beat down Aeneas. Homer,
Iliad, VII -264
» Cf. II. 8, 6 f. and note. 274
BOOK II. IX. 2 2-x. 5 —so huge a burden ! It is as though a man who was
unable to raise ten pounds wanted to lift the slone
of Aias.^
CHAPTER X
Hon is it possible to discover a mans duties from
the designations which he bears ? Consider who you are. To begin with, a Man ; that is, one who has no quality more sovereign than
moral choice, but keeps everything else subordinate
to it, and this moral choice itself free from slavery
and subjection. Consider, therefore, what those
things are from which you are separated by virtue
of the faculty of reason. You are separated from
wild beasts, you are separated from sheep. In
addition to this you are a citizen of the world, and
a part of it, not one of the parts destined for service,
but one of primary importance ; ^ for you possess the
faculty of understanding the divine administration
of the world, and of reasoning upon the conse- quences thereof. What, then, is the profession of
a citizen ? To treat nothing as a matter of private
profit, not to plan about anything as though he were
a detached unit, but to act like the foot or the hand,
which, if they had the faculty of reason and understood
the constitution of nature, would never exercise
choice or desire in any other way but by reference
to the whole. Hence the philosophers well say
that if the good and excellent man knew what was
going to happen, he would help on the processes of
disease and death and maiming, because he would
realize that this allotment comes from the orderly
275
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
royv oXoiv hiard^ew^ tovto aTrovifierai, Kupicorepov
Se TO oXov Tov /jLepovf kuI i) 7r6\i<; tov iroXirov.
6 }'vi> 5' on ov TrpoyiyvcocTKOfiev, Kad)')Kei rwv TTpo^
eKXoyjjv einpvecrripcov ex^o-Oai, on kuI tt/oo? tovto
yeyova/juev.
7 Mera tovto pAfxvi-jcro, oti f('o? el. Tt<? tovtov
TOV TTpoaoiTTov eTTayyeXia ,' TrdvTa tu^ avTov
riyelcrdai, tov iraTpo^, irdvTa viraxoveiv, prj^eiroTe
yjre^ai 7rp6<i Tiva prjSe ^XajBepov Ti avTW elirelv rj irpa^at, i^'cTTacrOai ev Trdaiv koI irapaxcopelv
crvvepyovvTa kutu hvvapiv.
8 Mera tovto XaOi oti kui dSeX(f)6<i el. Kal Trpo?
rovTO he to tt poacoTTOv o^etXerat 'Trapa')(^u)pr}cn<i,
evneiOeia, eucf)7]pia, prfSeTTor dvTnroii]a-aa6ai,
Tivo<i 7rp6<; aiiTov^ tmv dirpoaipeTayv, dXX" 7]8eo)<; eKelva irpoieadat., Xv iv toI<{ 7rpoaipeTiKol<; ttXcov
9 €)(rj(i. opa yap olov eaTiv uvtI OlhpaKO'i, dv
ouTCt)? Tv\r], Koi KaOehpwi avTOV euyuco/j,0(TVvr)v
KTrjaacrPaL, oar} <q irXeove^ia.
10 Mera tuvtu el ^ovXevTr)<; TroXeco? tivo^, oti
^uvXevTi]<i- el vea, oti veo^- el 7rpea/3vTT)<i, oti
11 Trpea^vTT)^' el TraTijp, oti iraTtjp. del yap
CKaaTov TMv ToiovTwv ovopdTwv el<i eiTiXoyiapov
12 ep\6p.evov VTToypdcfiei to, oLKeta epya. edv S' direXOcop yp-ey7j<i aov tov d8eX(j)ov, Xey(o col eire- 13 Xddov, Tt9 el Kal Tt crof 6vo/xa.* cItu el pev
* Reiske.
* Wolf: favrhv S.
' irKfov ex*'" {"^*'"'«l*'<»). "getting the best of it." usually
liad a bad sense, but there is a v\foyella which should attract the good man. 276
BOOK II. X. 5-13
arrangement of the whole, and the whole is more
sovereign than the part, and the state more sovereign
than the citizen. But as it is, seeing that we do
not know beforehand what is going to happen, it is our duty to cleave to that which is naturally more
fit to be chosen, since we are born for this purpose.
Next bear in mind that you are a Son. What is the profession of this character? To treat everything
that is his own as belonging to his father, to be obedient to iiim in all things, never to speak ill of him to anyone else, nor to say or do anything
that will harm him, to give way to him in everything
and yield him precedence, helping him as far as is within his power.
Next know that you are also a Brother. Upon
this character also there is incumbent deference,
obedience, kindly speech, never to claim as against
your brother any of the things that lie outside the
realm of your free moral choice, but cheerfully to give them up, so that in the things that do lie within
the realm of your free moral choice you may have
the best of it.^ For see what it is, at the price of a head of lettuce, if it so chance, or of a seat, for you
to acquire his goodwill—how greatly you get the
best of it there ! Next, if you sit in the town council of some city,
remember that you are a councillor ; if you are young, remember that you are young ; if old, that
you are an elder ; if a father, that you are a father.
For each of these designations, when duly considered,
always suggests the acts that are appropriate
to it. But if you go off and speak ill of your
brother, I say to you, " You have forgotten who
you are and what your designation is.'' Why, if you
277
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
')(^a\Kev<; cov ixP^ "^V (^4>^p(} a\.\a)<;, cTriXeXr]-
(TfM€vo<; av ?7? rov ^aX/ceo)?* et he rov d8e\(f)ov
iireXadov koI avrl d8e\(pov e-)^dpo<; iyevov, ovhev
14 dvr ovS^vo^ rfKXdydaL <f)ave2 aeavrw ^
; el 8' avrl
dvdpcoTTov, rj/jLepov ^(oov KoX KOivcoviKov, drjpiov
yeyovaii ^\a^ep6v, eiri^ovXov, hrjKTiKov, ovhev
aTroXcoXeica^ ; dXXd hel ae Kepfia diroXeaat, Xva
^t]LLtu)df]<;, dX\ov S' ovhevot aTrcoXeia ^rj/jLioi top
15 di'OpwTTOV ; elra ^ ypappLariKrjv fiev aTTO^aXoiv r) povaiKrjV ^7]p,[av av ^ ?)yov Trjv dircoXeLav avri]^'
el h' alh(b Kol KaTaaroXrjv koI ^fMeporrjra diro16
/8a\et9, ovhev i^yy to irpdypLa ; kultoi eKelva
p,ev Trap e^coOev riva koI dirpoaLperov airLav diToXXvTai, ravTa he Trap ^/j,d<;' Kal eKelva fxev ovT €)(eiv KaXov eariv * ovt^ aTToXXveiv al(T')(^pov
e<TTiv, ravra he Kal fir/ e')(€iv Kal diroXXveiv Kal
17 alcrxpov iari Kal eiroveihKJTOv Kal dTV')(r)p.a. n
diroXXvei o rd tov Kcvauhov 7rda)(^(ov ; rov avhpa.
6 he hiari6eL<; ; iroXXd p,ev Kal dXXa Kal avTO<i h
18 ovhev rjTTov tov dvhpa. ri diroXXvet o p,oi\ev(ji>v ; TOV alhrjp,ova, rov eyKparrj, tov Koapnov, tov ttoXlTT]v,
TOV yeiTova. tl diroXXvei 6 6pyi^6p,evo^ ; dXXo
19 Tl. 6 (f)o^ovp,€vo<i ; dXXo ti. ovhelf; hi-^a dirMXeia'^
Kal ^'//i-ta? KaK6<; eaTiv. Xonrov el tijv ^rjpiav
i^r)Tel<i ev KepfxuTi, TrdvTe^ ovtoi d^Xa^el<;, "^'i"
fiLoi,, av ovTO)^ '^^XV' '^^* OD(f)eXovp,ei>oi Kai
1 Schenkl : (pavf'is kavrui S. * Schenkl : e» S.
' Supplied by Koraes.
* KaXiv ioTiv supplied by Schenkl. 278
BOOK II. X. 13-19 were a smith and used your hammer amiss, you
would have forgotten the smith you were ; but if you forget the brother you are, and become an enemy instead of a brother, will you seem to yourself to have exchanged nothing for nothing ? And if, instead of being a man, a gentle and
social being, you have become a wild beast, a mischievous,
treacherous, biting animal, have you lost nothing ? What, must you lose a bit of pelf so as to
suffer damage, and does the loss of nothing else
damage a man ? Yet, if you lost your skill in the
use of language or in music, you would regard the
loss of it as damage ; but if you are going to lose
self-respect and dignity and gentleness, do you
think that does not matter? And yet those former
qualities are lost from some external cause tliat is beyond the power of our will, but these latter are
lost through our own fault ; and it is neither noble
to have nor disgraceful to lose these former qualities,
but not to have these latter, or having had
them to lose them, is a disgrace and a reproach and
a calamity. What is lost by the victim of unnatural
lust? His manhood. And by the agent? Beside
a good many other things he also loses his manhood
no less than the other. What does the adulterer
lose ? He loses the man of self-respect that was,
the man of self-control, the gentleman, the citizen,
the neighbour. What does the man lose who is given to anger ? Something else. Who is given
to fear? Something else. No one is evil without
loss and damage. Furthermore, if you look for your loss in pelf, all those whom I have just mentioned
snuffer neither injury nor loss ; nay, if it so chance, they even get gain and profit, when, through
279
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
KephaivovTe<i, orav 8id tcvo<; tovtwv twv epyrov
20 Kep/xa auToi? Trpoayevrjrai. opa S' el iirl fcepfidriov rrdvTa dvdj€i<i, on ovS* 6 rrjv plvd
(Toi diToWvcov earai 0€^\afM/j.evo<;. —Nai, (^rjalv, 21 KCKoXo^coTai yap to aco/xa. —"A7e, 6 Be ttjv
ocr<f>paai,av avrrjv diroXcoXeKcof; ovSev aTroWvei
;
'^v')(rj<i ovv 8vi'a/j,i^ ovk ccttlv ovBefila, rjv 6 fiev KTrjad/jLevo^i axpeXeiTai, o 8' aTTo^aXcbv ^Tj/jiiovTai ; 22 —Xlo'iav Kol \eyei<i
;
—Ovhev e^op-ev alSrjfjiov
(pvcret, ; — Ex^p,ev.—O tovto diroWvuiv ov ^rj- fjLiovTai, ovBevo^ crreplaKeTai, ovSev diro^dWei
23 Tb)V Trpo'i avrov ; ovk €)(^op,€v <j)va€i tl irLarov,
(f)vcr€i (TTepKTiKov, (ftvaet ^(peXririKov, dWrfXoiv
<f)vcr€i dvcKTiKov ; ocrTf? ovv eh Tavra nrepiopd
^rj/jiiovp.ei'ov eavrov, ovTO<i rj dj3\a^r]<i Kal
dt^i')p,io<; ; 24 Tt OVV ; firj ^Xdyjrw tov ^XdyjravTa ; —Upcoroi'
fiev IBov, Tt e'cTTt ^Xd/3r) Kal p.V7](T0T]Ti o)v 25 i)Kovaa<; irapd tmv <f)t,Xoa6(})(i)v. el yap rb
dyaOov ev irpoaipicTei Kal to kukov Q)aavT(o<; ev irpoaipeaei, /BXeire p-rj tolovt icTiv o Xeyei^' " tl 26 ovv ; eireiBrj €Kelvo<i eavTov e^Xayjrev irpof ep.e tl dhiKov TTOirjaa'i, eyoi ep,avTov /jltj fiXdxjfa) 7rpb<i 27 eKelvov dSiKov ti trotrjaa'; ; " tl ovv ov toiovtov tl <f)avTa^6p.€0a, dXX' ottov tl acop-aTCKov iXdTTcop-a
rj ^ eh KTrj(Tiv, ixel r/ /SXd^r), ottov el<; Tr]V 28 irpoaipeaiv, ovhepbia fiXd/3r) ; ovtb yap t^jv
1 Supplied by Wolf.
280
BOOK II. X. 19-28 some of their deeds just mentioned, they also
acquire pelf. But observe that if you make paltry
pelf your standard lor everything, not even the man
who loses his nose will in your eyes have suffered an
injury.—"Oh yes, he has," someone says, "for his body is mutilated."—Come now, and does the man
who has lost his entire sense of smell lose nothing?
Is there, then, no such thing as a faculty of the
mind, the possession of which means gain to a man,
and the loss, injury?—What faculty do you mean?
Have we not a natural sense of self-respect ?—We
have.—Does not the man who destroys this suffer a
loss, is he not deprived of something, does he not
lose something that belonged to him ? Do we not
have a natural sense of fidelity, a natural sense of
afl^ection, a natural sense of helpfulness, a natural sense of keeping our hands off" one another? Shall,
therefore, the man who allows himself to suffer
loss in such matters, be regarded as having suffered
neither injury nor loss ? Well, what then ? Am I not to injure the man
who has injured me?—First consider what injury
is, and call to mind what you have heard the
philosophers say. For if the good lies in moral
purpose, and the evil likewise in moral purpose, see
if what you are saying does not come to something
like this, " Well, what then ? Since so-and-so has
injured himself by doing me some wrong, shall I not injure myself by doing him some wrong ?
"
Why, then, do we not represent the case to ourselves
in some such light as that ? Instead of that,
where there is some loss afl^ecting our body or our
property, there we count it injury ; but is there no
injury where the loss affects our moral purpose ? VOL. I. T 281
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
K€(f>aXT]v aXyei 6 e^airaTrjOeX'; r) a8iKii(Ta<; ovre Tov cx^daXjjLOV ovre to la'^iov, cure tov aypov
29 cLTroWvei. rjfiel^ S' aWo ovSev iOeXofiev rj ravTW rrjv Trpoalpeaiv Be rrorepov aiZrjfxova koX
Tria-TrjV e^ofieu rj aval(T')(yvTOv KaX diriaTov, ovS"
iyyv<; hia^epofieda ttXtjv /jLovov ev rfj aypXfi fie\pL
30 rSiV Xoyapicov. roiyapoiiv fJ^^XP'' "^^^ Xoyapicov
irpoKOTrrofiev, e^co S' avTcov ovBe to eXdxio-Tov.
la. Tt? apx^ <f>iXo<TO(f)La'; ;
1 'Ap^r} (f)iXoao(f>ia<; irapd ye toi<; o)9 Set koI Kara
dvpav (iTTrofxevoifi avTrj<i avvaiadrjai^ Trj<; aurov
aadeveia<i Kal ahvvaiiia<t irepl ra dvayxaia.
2 opOoywviov ^ev yap rpiyuivov fj 8i€cre(i)<; tj/xitovvov ^
ovSefiiav (pvaei evvoiav rjKOfxev exovref, dXX e«
Tti'09 T€XviKr]<; TrapaXr)y^eo)<; hthaaKOfieda eKaarov
avTMv Kal 8id tovto ol fit) etSore? avTO, ov8* ot'ovrot
3 elSevai. dyadov he Kal KaKov Kal KaXov Kal
alcrxpov Kal TrpeTTOVTO<i Kal dirpeTTOVf Kal evBatfiovia<;
kuI irpoariKOVTOs Kai iTTij3dXXovTo<; Kai
6 Tt hel TTOirjaai. Kal o ti ov Bel iroirjaai Tt? ovk
4 eycov €ix(f)VTOV evvoiav eXrfXvdev ; Bid tovto
TravTe? xP^f^^^^ '^^^'* ovofiacriv Kal €(l)apfio^eiv
* tl TifiiTovlov s, perhaps rightly.
282
BOOK II. X. 28-xi. 4
For the man who has been deceived or who has
done some wrong has no pain in his head, or his eye, or his hip, neither does he lose his land. But
these are the things we care for and nothing else ; yet the question whether we are going to have a moral purpose characterized by self-respect and
good faith, or by shamelessness and bad faith, does
not so much as begin to disturb us, except only in
so far as we make it a topic of trivial discussion in the classroom. Therefore, so far as our trivial dis- cussions go, we do make some progress, but, apart
from them, not even the very least.
CHAPTER XI
What M the beginning of philosophy ? The beginning of philosophy with those who take
it up as they should, and enter in, as it were, by the
gate, is a consciousness of a man's own weakness and
impotence with reference to the things of real con- sequence in life. For we come into being without
any innate concept of a right-angled triangle, or of
a half-tone musical interval, but by a certain systematic
method of instruction we are taught the
meaning of each of these things, and for that reason
those who do not know them also do not fancy that
they do. But, on the other hand, who has come
into being without an innate concept of what is good
and evil, honourable and base, apj)ropriate and in- appropriate, and happiness, and of what is proper and
falls to our lot, and what we ought to do and what
we ought not to do } Wherefore, we all use these
terms and endeavour to adapt our preconceptions
283
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
7reip(i}fie6a Ta<; irpo\rjy\rei<i ral'i iirl fj,epov<i oualai^.
5 KaX(o<i eTTOLTjaev, BeovTWf, ov heovrux;' rjTv^rja-ev,
€vrv~)(riaev' ahiK6<i eariv, 8i,Kai6<; icmv. Tt9
r)fio)v t^eiherau rovrtov rcov ovo/kitcov ; rL<i rj^wv
ava^dWerai rrjV ')(^prjaiv avrayv ^k)(pi fidOrj KaddTTCp
rwv Trepl Ta<} ypa/x/u,a<i rj rov<{ (f>d6yyov^ ol ovk
6 elSoTe^ ; rovrov S" airiou to rjKeLV r}hii Tiva vtto
T7J<i (pu(T6co<i Kara top tottov OiaTrep SeBcSayfj,€vov<;,
d(f> (OV opfj,ot)fj,€voi Kol Ti]v oir)aiv irpoa7
ei\i'}(j>afi,ev. Nr/ Ata yap (f)vaei^ ovk olSa eyu) to
KaXoi/ KoX TO aia)(^p6v; ovk e;^&) evvoiav avTov;—
''E;^et9.
—
Ovk e(f)ap/j,6^Q) Toif €7rl /xepov;; —'E^ap8
fio^ei'i.—Ov «aX,&>9 ovv i(f)apfMo^(o ; —^EvTavdd
eaTi TO ^rjTriiMa irdp Kal octjcti^ ivravda irpoayiveTai.
a<p ofioXoyov/xePtov yap opfioofievoc tovtcou eVt
TO dfjL(j)i(T^r)Tovfievov Trpodyovcriv vtto ttj<i d-KaTaX9
Xi]Xov e<^apfJioyr)<;. &)<? el ye kuI tovto €ti 7rpo<; eKei10
voL^ eKeKTrjvTO, rt eKoiXve aurouf eluai TcXelovi;; vvv
3' eVet hoKel'i oti Kal KaTaXX^Xa}<i €<f)apfio^€i<; ra?
TrpoXr]yfrei<; Tot<? eTTt fiepovf;, eiire fioi, iroOev tovto
Xa/jL,3dvei^ ; — Ort hoKel /not. —Touti ^ ovv tlvi ov
BoK€i, Kal OLCTai Kal avTO<; i(f>ap/jLo^€iv KaXo^i' t] 11 OVK olerai ; —Oierat.
—
^vvwrOe ovv irepl wv tvL
pi,a)(^6/jLei'a So^d^ere dfKporepoi KaTaXXr]X(i)<; €(^ap12
fjLo^etv Ta-i 7rpoXr]\lr€i<i ; —Ov Svvdfxeda.—'^E)(^€i<;
^ Schenkl (note) : Aia yap <pr]aly S,
• Schenkl : Tovrui H. 284
BOOK II. XI. 4-12
about them to the individual instances. " He has
done well, as he ought, or as he ought not ; he has
been unfortunate, or fortunate ; he is a wicked man,
or he is a just man "—who of us refrains from
expressions of this kind ? Who of us waits before
he uses them until he has learned what they mean,
as those who have no knowledge of lines or sounds
wait before they use the terms relating to them ? The reason is that we come into the world with a certain amount of instruction upon this matter already
given us, as it were, by nature, and that starting with
this we have added thereto our opinion.—Yes, by Zeus,
for do I in my own case not have by gift of nature
knowledge of what is noble and base ; do I not have
a concept of the matter.''—You do.—Do I not apply
it to individual instances?—You do. —Do I not, then,
apply it properly?—There lies the whole question,
and there opinion comes in. For men start with
these principles upon which they are agreed, but
then, because they make an unsuitable application
of them, get into disputes. Since if, in addition
to having the principles themselves, they really
possessed also the faculty of making suitable
a})plication of the same, what could keep them from
being perfect? But now, since you think that you
can also apply your preconceptions suitably to the
individual cases, tell me, whence do you get this gift?—It is because I think so.—But on this precise
point someone else does not think so, and yet he too
fancies that he is applying the principles properly,
does he noti*—He does so fancy.—Can both of you,
then, be making suitnble applications of your
preconceptions in the matters upon which your
opinions are at variance ? —We cannot.—Can you,
285
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovv Sei^al Ti r}fiiv Trpo? to aura? €(f)apfjio!^€iv
dfieivov dvcoTepo) rov Bokciv croi ; 6 Se /xaiv6/jL€vo<;
a\Xa Tiva iroiel rj ra hoKOvvrd oi Kokd ; KUKeivq) ovv dpKel Tovro rb KpLr^piov ; —Ou« dpKel. —
'E\^e^ ovv eVt ri dvcoTepo) rov SoKeiv.—Tt tovto
iaTLV ; 13 "IS' dpxv 4)i\oao(pia<;' atadrjcrc<; fjid^V'i t% tt/jo?
dW7]\ov<i Tcov dvOpcoTTcov Koi ^i]Tr)cn<i rov Trap o ylveTat rj P'd)(ri Kal KaTayvwai^ koX dirKXTLa 7rpo<i
TO •KJnXoi)'; hoKovv, epevva 8e Tt? irepl to 8okovv el
6pd(t)<i SoKel Kol €vpecn<; Kav6vo<i rivo^, olov iTrl ^apS)v rov ^vyov evpofiev, olov eirl evdecov koI
14 (TTpe^Xwv TTjv crrdd/jbriv.—Tout' eariv dp^h (pt^o-
(T0(i)ia'i ; TrdvTa «a\w? e^6t rd BoKovvra diraat ; Kat TTW? hvvarov rd fiaxop-eva /caXco? e^^iv
;
15 ovKOVV ov TTavra.—'AWa rd ?)/jLtv Bokovvtu;^ tl fidWov Tj rd ^vpoL<i, tL pudWov rj rd KlyvTniot,<i,
Ti p.dWov rj rd ip-ol (^aivofieva rj rd tw Selvi
;
—
OvBev fidWov. —OvK dpa apxel rb Bokovv eKacrru)
irpb^; rb elvar ovSe ydp em ^apSiV rj jxerpoiv
'>\ri,\f] rfj i/j,(f)dcrei dpKovfMeda, dXXa Kavova riva
16 60' eKacrrov evpofiev evravO^ ovv ovSel<i Kavcov
dvcorepo) rov hoKelv ; Kal ttw? oIoi' re d^eK/xapra
elvat, kclI dvevpera rd dvayKaiorara iv dvdpcoTroK ;
1 Sc: i\ecov s.
* Kronenberg : ovkovv ov wdvTa, iAXa to Tjfuv SoKovvra. S
(and Schenkl).
1 "Each man" {tKaa-Tos, as below, § 15) would have been a more lo^'ical form for this question, for it is clear from the context that Epictetus is not speaking here of the actual
correctness of any opinion universally held, but only of any
opinion held by any man. 286
BOOK II. XI. 12-16
then, show us anything higher than your ovm
opinion which will make it possible for us to apply
our preconceptions better? And does the madman
do anytiiing else but that which seems to him to be
good ? Is this criterion, then, sufficient in his case also?—It is not.—Go, therefore, to something
higher than vour own opinion, and tell us what
that is. Behold the beginning of philosophy I —a recognition
of the conflict between the opinions of
men, and a search for the origin of that conflict,
and a condenmation of mere opinion, coupled with
scepticism regarding it, and a kind of investigation
to determine whether the opinion is rightly held,
together with the invention of a kind of standard of
judgement, as we have invented the balance for the
determination of weights, or the carpenter's rule for the determination of things straight and crooked.
—
Is this the beginning of philosophy ? Is everything
right that every man thinks ? ^ Nay, how is it possible for conflicting opinions to be right? Consequently,
not all opinions are ri^iit. —But are our opinions right? Why ours, rather than those of
the Syrians ; why ours, rather than those of the
Egyptians ; why ours, rather than my own, or those
of so-and-so.''—There is no reason why.—Therefore,
the opinion which each man holds is not a sufficient criterion for determining the truth ; for also in the
case of weights and measures we are not satisfied with the mere appearance, but we have invented a
certain standard to test each. In the present case, then, is there no standard higher than opinion?
And yet how can it possibly be that matters of the
utmost consequence among men should be unde287
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
17 —^"EffTti^ ovv.—Kai Bia ri ov KrjTOVfiev avrov xai
avevpicTKOfxev koX avevpovre^ \onrov a7rapa/3aT&)?
)(poi)/x€da St%a ai/TOv fiijSe tov BaKTvXov 6«T€t18
vovre^ ; rovro yap, olfiai, earlv h evpedev airdkXdcrcrei
fiavia^ tou? p,6va) tw SoKetv p^irpo) Travrtov
'y^pwpevov'i, iva \onrbv airo tivcov yvcopLficov Kai
SievKptvrjfievoov opficofievoi '^^pcofieOa i^rl rwv ctti
lxkpov<i hi-qpOpoifMevai^ Tot'i TTpoX'^yp'ei. 19 T/? vTTOTreTTTcoKev ovaia irepX 179 ^r]TOvp.ev ;—
20 'HSovj;.
—
"T-rraye uvttjv tgj Kavovi, /SaXe et? tov
^vyop. TO ayadov hel elvai toiovtov, e^' cS Oappelv
d^iov Kai m ireTroidevat ;—Aei.
—
^K^ej3ai(p ovv
21 TLVt Oappelv d^iov
;
—Ov.—M?; tl ovv ^e^atov rj
rjSovi] ;—Ov.—"* Kpov ovv Ka\ /SaXe e^o) eic tov
^vyovxal aireXaaov t?}? %<w/oa? tS)V ayaQtav p.aKpdv.
22 el K ovK o^vjSXeirTel'i Kai ev crot ^vyov ovk dpKel,
(ficpe dXXo. iirl tw dyaOtp d^iov eTraipeadai, ;—
Nat.—'E^' rjSovf) ovv irapovarj d^iov eTraipeadai, ; /3\€7re fir) et'Jrrj<; OTi d^iov el 8e pbrj, ovkcti ae
ov8e TOV ^vyov d^iov rjyrjcrop^ai. 23 05x0)9 KpiveTai to, TrpdyfUiTa Kai 'laTaTaL tcov 24 Kavovoov fjTOifjbaafievcov Kai to (f>iXo(TO<f)elv tovto
ea-Tiv, eTTicrKeTnea-dai Kai ^e^aiovv tov<; Kavova^,
25 TO S' rjZr) '^prjcrOai T0t9 iyvooafievoi^ tovto tov
xaXov Kai ayadov epyov ea-Tiv. 388
BOOK II. XI. 16-25
terminable and undiscoverable.—Therefore, there ii some standard. —Then why do we not look for it and find it, and when we have found it thenceforth
use it unswervingly, not so much as stretching out our finger without it? For this is something, I think, the discovery of which frees from madness
those who use only opinion as the measure of all things, so that thenceforward, starting with certain
principles that are known and clearly discriminated,
we may use in the judgement of specific cases an
organically articulated system of preconceived ideas. What subject has arisen that we wish to investi- gate?—Pleasure. —Subject it to the standard, put
it into the balance. Should the good be the sort of
thing that we can properly have confidence and
trust in?—It should. —Can we properly have confidence,
then, in something that is insecure? —No.
—
Pleasure contains no element of security, does it?
—
No.—Away with it, then, and throw it out of the
balance, and drive it far away from the region of
things good. But if you are not endowed with
keen eyesight and if one balance is not enough for you, bring another. Can one properly feel elated over the good ?—Yes. —Can one properly feel elated,
then, over the moment's pleasure ? See that you
do not say that it is proper ; if you do, I shall no
longer regard you as a proper person even to have a balance I And so are matters judged and weighed, if we have
the standards ready with which to test them ; and
the task of philosophy is this—to examine and to
establish the standards ; but to go ahead and use them after they have become known is the task
of the good and excellent man.
289
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
t/S'. Hepl Tov StaXeyea-dai.
1
' A fiev Bet fiadouTa elSeiai ')(^prj(Tdai. X07&), rjKpi-
^(orai VTTO Twv r^fierepaiv' irepl he rrjv -^prjaiv
avTOiv Ti-jv TTpoarjKOvaav reXew? ar^-upvaaTo'i iaixev.
2 ho<i yovv a> dekeis ijimmvISicottjv riva tov rrpocrSiaXeyo/iievov'
Kal ov)(^ evpiaKei )(^pt](Tacr6at avTco, dWa fiiKpa Kivqaa^i tov avdpwnov, av irapa
(TKeXa ^ diravTa eKelvo^, ovKeTi SvvaTai /u,eTa')(€ipiaaadai,
a)OC rj XoiSopel Xonrov rj KUTayeXd koX
Xeyei " iSi.ooTr}^ iuTiv ov/c eaTiv avT& "X^prjaacOat,.^^
368' oBijyo'i, OTav Xdffrj Tivd TrXavcofievov, ijyajev
iirl TTjv ohov Tr)v Biovcrav, ov)(l KaTUyeXdawi 17 4 Xoi8opri(Tdp,€vo<; dirrjXdev. Kal av Sel^ov avTw
TTjv dXijOeiav Kal o^jrec oti aKoXovdel. p-expi ^' av ov fiT) BeiKVVT/^, firj eKelvov KarayeKa, dXXd
fidXXov alaOdvov t% d8vvap,La<; tt}? avTov.
6 rift)? ovv iirolei 'S.coKpdTrj^; ; avTov rjvdyKat^ev
TOV 7rpoaBiaXey6p,€vov avTW fiapTvpetv, dXXov 8' ovSevo^ iSeiTO /j,dpTvpo<;. Toiyapovv i^rjv avTu)
Xeyecv oti " tov<; puev dXXov<; eco ^atpefi', del 8e tm
dvTiXeyovTi dpKovpai jxapTvpc Kal tov<; p,ev dXXov<;
ovK e7ri.ylrr]<f)L^(o, tov Be Trpoa-BiaXeyo/nevov
6 p,6vov" ovTco yap ivapyrj eTiOei to, diro twv
evvoicov, ft)(TTe Trdvd' ovTivaovv avvaiadavopevov
7 Trj<; P'd'X'n'i dva^^^pelv dir avTrj^. " *Apd ye 6
^ iraph n4\os {" off the tune, out of harmony ") s, perhaps
correctly.
* A free paraphrase of Plato, Oorgias, 474a ; compare
also 472c. A still freer paraphrase of the same general
idea appears in II. 26, 6. 290
BOOK II. xu. 1-7
CHAPTER XII
Upon the art of argumentation What a man ought to learn before he will knowhow
to conduct an argument has been precisely
defined by the philosophers of our school ; but as to the proper use of what we have learned we are
still utterly inexperienced. At all events, give to anyone of us you please some lavman with whom to carry on an argument ; he will find no way of dealing
with him, but after moving the man a little, in case the latter thwarts him, our man gives up trying to handle him, and thereafter either reviles him, or laughs him to scorn, and remarks, "He is a mere
layman ; it is impossible to do anything with him."
But the real guide, whenever he finds a person
going astray, leads him back to the right road,
instead of leaving him with a scornful laugh or an insult. So also do you show him the truth and
you will see that he follows. But so long as you do
not show him the truth, do not laugh him to scorn,
but rather recognize your own incapacity.
How did Socrates act? He used to force the
man who was arguing with him to be his witness,
and never needed any other witness. That is why
he could say, " I can dispense with all the others,
and am always satisfied to have my fellow-disputant
for a witness ; and the votes of the rest I do not
take, but only that of my fellow-disputant."^ For
he used to make so clear the consequences which
followed from the concepts, that absolutely evervone
realized the contradiction involved and gave up
the battle. "And so does the man who feels envy
391
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
<f)dov(ov ')(atpei ; "—" Ou5a/ic59, aXka fidWov
XvTretrai.'^ dirb rov ivavriov eKLvqae rov TrXrjcriov.
** Tt 8'; iirl KaKol<; Sokcc aoi elvai XvTrr) o <^96vo<i;
8 KoX Tt 6 <f)P6vo<i eVrt kukcov ; " ovkovv eKclvov
iiroLTjaev elTreiv on Xvirr) iarlv eV dya6ol<i 6
(f)06vo'i. " Tt Be ; (ftdovoii] av rt? toI<; ovhev tt/jo? 9 avTov;"—" OuSa/ift>9.'' koI ovrcof eKTreTrXrjp(OKO}<;
rrjv evvoiav Koi BLr)pdpoDKO)<i a7rr]X\aaaero,
ov Xeycov otl " opiaai puoi rov <p66vou,'^ elra
6piaap,evov " kukm^ wpicra)' ov jap avraKoXovOei
10 Tft) K€cf)a\ai(oS€i TO opiKov " 'prjp,ara re'^viKa kul
Sia Tovro ToU lSiMTai<i (fiopriKo, koI SvcnrapaKoXovdrjja,
oiv r]p,el^ aTToaTfjvat ov hvvdpeOa.
11 e'^ wv S' avTO^ 6 l8i(OTr)<; eTTUKoXouOoiv ral<i avrov <^avraaiaL<i irapa-^^^aiprja-ai hvvair av Tt
fj dderPjaai, ovBap-co^ Bia tovtoov avrov Kivrjaai
12 Bwafxeda. Kcil Xoittov eiKoro)^ avvaiaOavo/jievoi
ravrrff; tj/jlcov tt)? d8vva/jLLa<; dire'y^opeda rov
13 Trpdy/j,aTo<i, 6aoL<f y icrri ri evXa^eia<^. oi Be TToXXol Kal ecKaloi avyicaOevre^ el'? ri roiovrov
(f)vpoi'rat Kal (f)upovai Kat, ra reXevrala
XoiBoprjcravre'i Kal XoiBopr}6€vre<; d7rep)(^ovTat.
14 To irpoiTov Be rovro Kal fidXiara XBiov 'EcoKpdrovi
firjBeTTOTe Trapo^vvOPjvai ev Xoyat, fiTjBeTTore
XoiBopov TrpoeveyKacrdai p,T}Bev, p,r]BeTro9^ vj3pi-
^ Based on Xenophon, Memorabilia, III. 9, 8, and Plato,
Philebus, 48b, and following.
292
BOOK II. XII. 7-14
rejoice in it.?"^-—"Not at all; but he experiences
pain rather than joy." (By the contradiction in
terms he has moved the other party to the argument.)
" Very well, does envy seem to you to be
feeling of pain at evils? And yet what envy is there of evils?" (Consequently, he has made his opponent say that envy is a feeling of pain at good
things.) " Very well, would a man feel envy
about matters that did not concern him in the
least?"—"Not at all." And so he filled out and
articulated the concept, and after that went his way ; he did not start in by saying, " Define envy for me," and then, when the other had defined it, remark, " That is a bad definition you have made,
for the definition term does not fit the subject defined."
Those are technical terms, and for that reason wearisome to the layman and hard for him
to follow, and yet we are unable to dispense with
them. But as to terms which the layman could
himself follow, and so, by the assistance of his own
external impressions, be able to accept or reject some proposition—we are absolutely unable to move him by their use. The result is that, recognizing
this incapacity of ours, we naturally refrain
from attempting the matter, those of us, 1 mean,
who are at all cautious. But the rash multitude
of men, when once they have let themselves
in for something of this sort, get confused themselves
and confuse others, and finally, after reviling
their opponents and being themselves reviled, they
walk away.
Now this was the first and most characteristic
thing about Socrates, that he never got wrought up
during an argument, never used any term of abuse
«93
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(TTiKov, aWa t5)v XoiSopovvTCOv aveyeaOai kol
15 Traveiv fid')(r}v. el deXcTe yvMvai, iroa-rjv iv
TOVT(p SvvafAiv elxev, dvdyv(OTe to 'B,evo<^SiVTO<i
^ufiTToaiov Kal oyp-ecrde iroaa'i f^d-^af SiaXiXvxev.
16 8id TovTO elKOTtof; Kal Trapa TOi<i iroiijTal'i iv
fieyia-TO) eTraivw XeXeKrai to
alyfrd re koI fieya veiKO^ eirt.aTaixevw'i Karerravaev.
17 Tt ovv ; ov Xiav eVrt vvv da(f)aX€<; to irpayfxa
Kal fxdXiaTa iv 'Poo/i?;. tov yap troiovvTa avTO
ovK iv yayvla SrjXovoTt herjcrei iroielv, dXXa irpoaeXOovTa
v-naTLKM tivi, av ovtco<; tv^V' TrXovaia)
TTvdecrOai avTou " e;^ei9 P'Oi elirelv, <w ovTa, m
18 Tivi Tov<; iTTTTOu^ Tov<i (TeavTOV 7rapeB(0Ka<; ;"
" €70)76." " dpa TO) TVXovTi Kal aTreipm linrcKr]<;
;" " ovBap,a)<;" " t'l 8',* c5 tlvi to )(^pv(7iov
rj to dpyvpiov rj ttjv iaOrjTa ; " " ovhe raOra to) 19 Tu^ovTi." "to (TOifxa he to aavTov rjht) tlvI eaKeyfraL iTnTpe-^ai eU iirifieXeLav avTOV ;" " Trco? yap ov ; " " ifnreipa) hrfKovoTi Kal tovtw dXenrTi20
KTj'i rj laTpiKTjf ; " " irdvv fiev ovv." " iroTepov
Taind croi to, KpdTiaTd iaTiv rj Kal dXXo ti
iKTrjaoo irdvTcov dfjueivov ; " " irolov Kal Xeyei^ ;
' " TO auTot? VT] ^la TovToi<i ')(^pd>/j,evov Kal Soki-
/xd^ov eKua-Tov Kal ^ovXevofxevov. " apa ye Ttjv 21 "^v)(r)v Xiyei^ ; " " opdo)'; v7reXa^€<;. TavT-qv yap
^ Hesiod, Theogony, 87. «94
BOOK II. XII. 14-21
or insolence^ but endured the abuse of others, and
put an end to strife. If you wish to know how
^reat was the faculty lie had in this field, read the
Symposium of Xenophon, and you will see how many
cases of strife he settled. Therefore, and with good
reason, among the poets also very high praise has
been accorded to the following sentiment
:
" Soon doth he shrewdly make an end of a quarrel
though weighty."^
Well, what then ? Nowadays this activity is not
a very safe one, and especially so in Rome. For
the man who engages in it will clearly be under
obligation not to do it in a comer, but he must
go up to some rich person of consular rank, if it io chance, and ask him, " You there, can you tell to whose care you have entrusted your horses ?
"
"I can, indeed," answers the man. "Is it, then, some chance comer, a man who knows nothing about
the care of horses?" "Not at all." "And what
then ? Can you tell me to whom you have entrusted
your gold, or your silver, or your clothing?" "I
have not entrusted these, either, to a chance comer," " And have you ever thought about entrusting your
body to someone to look after it?" "Why, certai/ily."
" And, of course, he too is a man of special
skill in the art of physical training, or medicine,
is he not?" "Yes, indeed." "Are these your
most valuable j>ossessions, or have you something
else that is better than all of them?" "Just what
do you mean?" "That, by Zeus, which utilizes these other things, and puts each of them to the
test, and exercises deliberation?" "Ah so, you
are talking about my soul, are you ? " " You have
295
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TOt Kol Xeyco. " iroXv vrj Aia rmv aWtov tovto
22 afieivov Sokco fioi KeKTrjadai," " e^et? ovv elireiv,^
OTtp TpoTTU) T% "^^X^^ eTTtfiefieXriaat, ; ov yap
elKTJ y^Q}<i ^ erv^j^v ecKO'i ae ovto)<; cro(f)6v ovra
KoX iv rfi TToXef 86ki/xov to Kpariarov tmv aeav- Tov irepiopdv dfieXov/xevov koI airoWvp-evou.
23 " ovSafio)^.^^ " aXX,' avTb<; iTri/ii€fieX')]aai avrov ; 24 TTorepov p,adoov irapd rov rj evpoov avT6<i ;" eoSe \oiTTOv 6 KivSuvo^, fJ'i] TTpwrov fiev eiTTT} " rt Be croi fieXei, ffe\ricrT6 ; Kvpi6<; ^ fiou el ; " elr av eiri-
/i€i,VT}<i Trpdy/jLara 'irape-)(<ov, Biapdfievo<; Kovhvkovi
25 croL Sft). TovTOV tov TTpdyp,aTO<i ^IP'^fV ttotc
^r)\Q)Trj<; koX avTO'i, Trplv et? Tavra e/xTTeaeiv.
Ij . Tlepl TOV dycovidv.
1 Orav dyan'iMVTa iSco dvdpwnov, Xeyw oyro?
Tt TTore OeXei ; el firj tmv ovk e^' ainfo ri r]deXev,
2 TTW? dv ert rjyoovia ; Bid tovto kuI 6 KiOapatBo-i
pLOVO^ puev dBoov ovk aywvia, eh OeuTpov 6' et<r- epxopeva, KCLv Xiav ev(j)(oi'0<i ff koI KaXwq KiOapi^rj'
ov ydp dcrai povov deXei KaX(a<;, aXXa xai
evBoKip.r}(TaL, tovto B^ ovkcti ia-Tiv eV avTW.
3 Xoiirov ov pev -q iTriaTijpr] aiiTcp irpoaeaTiv, e/cet
1 Schenkl : iifuv S (elvi^v i]fj.'v s). * Schenkl : y' i)s S. » C. Schenkl : rls S. 296
BOOK II. XII. 2I-XII1. 3 understood me aright, for it is precisely this that
I am talking about." "By Zeus, I regard this as
far and away the most valuable of all my possessions."
"Can you, then, tell in what way you have taken
care of your soul ? For it is not to be sup{X)sed
that as wise a man as yourself and one so honoured
in the city is recklessly and at random allowing the
very best of his possessions to go to ruin through
neglect." " Certainly not." " But have you yourself
taken care of that possession ? Did you learn
how to take care of it from somebody else, or did
you discover how yourself?" Then comes the
danger that first he will say, " What is that to you,
good sir ? Are you my master ? " and after that,
if you persist in annoying him, that he will lift his
fist and give you a blow. This was a pursuit that
I too was very fond of once upon a time, before I fell to my present estate.
CHAPTER XIII
Of anxtetif When I see a man in anxiety, I say to myself,
What can it l)e that this fellow wants ? For if he did
not want something that was outside of his control,
how could he still remain in anxiety ? That is why
the citharoede when singing all alone shows no
anxiety, but does so when he enters the theatre, even though he has a very beautiful voice and plays the
cithara admirably ; for he does not wish merely
to sing well, but also to win applause, and that is no
longer under his control. Accordingly, where he
has skill, there he shows confidence. Set before him
297
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TO dap(To<i' (fyepe ov ^eXet? IBicorrjv koI ovk iirc- <np€(f)€Taf oTTov S OVK olSev ovSe /xe/xeXeTrjKev, 4 exel dycovia. rt 5' eari rovro ; ovk olhev, tl
icTTtv o)(\o<; ovSk Ti ox^ov e7raivo<i- aXXa Trjv
vrjTriv fiev rvvreLv efiaOev koI t^v vTrdrrjv, eirai- vo? 8' 6 irapd TMv "jroWoyv tl eaTc Koi Tiva
hvvap,iv e%€i ev ^iw ovtb olSev ovTe pepekeTrjKev
5 avTO. avdyKTj Xotirov Tpe/xeiP koX ci))(pidv.
Ki0ap<p86v pev ovv ov Svvapai elTrelv prj elvai,
OTav tSco TLvd (fio^ovpevov, dWo Se ti Svi^apai
6 elrretv Kal ouSe ev, dWd iroWd. kuI rrpcoTov
irdvToyv ^evov avTov koXw KaX Xeyoi' ovto<; 6 avdpwiTO<i OVK olSev irov t% yrj<; iaTiv, dW €k
ToaovTov -x^povov eTriSijpSv dyvoei tol'9 vopov^
TJ7? TToXea)? Kal to, edr] Kal tI e^eaTi koI tl ovk
e^ea-TLV aXX' ovhe vopiKov Tiva irapeXa^ev
TTcoTTOTC Tov ipovvTa avTU) Kal e^riyrjaopevov Ta
7 v6p,ip,a' dWa BiaOrJKijv pev ov ypd(f>€i p,r} el^cof
TTfti? 8el ypd(f)eiv rj TrapaXaBoiv top elBoTa ovB
iyyvTjv dXXw'i (T(f)payi^€Tai rj da(pdXeiav ypd(f)€i,
6pe^€t Se ^/9J}Tat St%a vopuKoi) Kal eKKXiaei Kal
8 opp^ Kal imlSoXfj Kal TrpoOecreL. 7ra)9 ^i-X^ voptKOv ; OVK olhev oti OeXet Ta pi] BtBopeva Kal ov diXec TO, dvayKala Kal ovk olhev ovTe Ta Ihia
ovTe Ta dXXorpia. el Be 7' 'pBei, ovheTTOT dv
iveTToBl^CTO, ovheTTOT eKwXveTO, ovk dv r)ya)Via.
298
BOOK II. XIII. 3-8
any layman that you please, and the mu-siciau pays no attention to him ; but in a matter of which he has no knowledge, and which he has never studied,
there he is in anxiety. What is the meaning of
this ? Why, he simply does not know what a crowd
is, or the applause of a crowd ; to be sure, he has
learned how to strike the lowest and the highest
strings on the cithara, but what the praise of the
multitude is, and what function it has in life, that he
neither knows nor has studied. Hence he must
needs tremble and turn pale.
Now then, I cannot say that the man is not a
citharoede, when I see anyone in a state of fear,
but I can say something else of him, and, indeed, not one thing only, but a number of things. And first of
all, I call him a stranger and say : This man does
flot know where in the world he is, but though he
has been living here so long a time, he is ignorant of
the laws of the city and its customs, what he is allowed to do and what he is not allowed to do.
Nay more, he has never even called in a lawyer to
tell him and explain to him what are the usages
conformable with law ; yet he does not write a will without knowing how he ought to write it or else
calling in an expert, nor does he just casually affix his seal to a bond or give a written guarantee ; but
without the services of a lawyer he exercises desire
and aversion and choice and design and purpose.
How do I mean " without the services of a lawyer " .'' Why, he does not know that he is wishing for things
that are not vouchsafed him, and wishing to avoid
the inevitable, and he does not know either what is his own or what is another's. Did he but know, he
would never feel hindered, never constrained, would
299
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
9 TTw? <^ap ov ; (f)o/3elrai ri<i ovv vtrep Toyv firj kuK(Jt)v
;
—Ou.—Ti 8'; vvep rcov KaKOiv jiev, iir 10 avTO) 8 ovrcov wtrre firj (TVfi^rjvai ;—OuSa/xw?.
—
Et ovv ra fiev cnrpoaipe'Ta ovt a'yada ovt€ kuku, ra irpoaipeTiKa 8e iravra i(f) rj/xlv kol ovt a<^e- \eadai Ti? t)/j.mv avra Bvvarai ovre irepnTOirjcai a ov deKofiev avTOiv, ttov ert, totto? dycoviwi
;
11 aWa Trepi tov (TcofiaTiov aycoviMfiev, virep rov
KTTjaiSiou, irepi rov ri So^ei rq> Kaiaapi, irepl
T(ov eaco S' ovB€v6<;. fi7] ri irepi rov fir) yfrevSo^
viroXa^elv ;—Oi;* e7r' e/xoi <ydp iariv. —M?; rt TOV op/xyjaai irapa (pvaiv ;—Ovhe irepX tovtov.—
12 'Oral' ovp I'Sj^? tlvo, (o^picjvra, &)9 o laTpo<; atro TOV ')(^p(OfxaTO<i ^eyet, "tovtov 6 airXrjv irifrovde,
TOVTOV he TO ^Trap," outw? koI av Xeye "tovtov
ope^is KOL 6KK\icn^ TTeirovdev, ovk evoBei, (}>X€y- 13 fxaiuec." ^(^pwfia yap ov ficTa^dWei ovSep aX\o
ovSe Tpofjiov TToiel ovSe \lr6(f)ov t&v oSovtcop ovBe
fi6TOK\d^ei KOL 67r' d/ji(f>OT€pov<; TToSa? i^ei. 14 Bid TOVTo Zijvwv fiev ^KvTiyovu) p-eWcov evTvy)(dveip
OVK r]ya)via' a yap ovto^ eOavpa^ev, tovtcov
ovBevo<; el^j^ei' eVeii'o? i^ovaiav, wv 6' eL-y^ev eKCivof
15 OVK eTreaTpe(J3eTo ovto<;' 'AvTLyovo<i Be Ztjvcovi
/xeXXwv evTvyxdvetv rjyoovia, kuI €'k6tco<;' r)9eXe
yap dpeaKGLv avTW, tovto B e^oo e/cetro* ovro<i B'
1 Homer, Ih'ad, XIII. 281 ; that is, the coward in ambush
is restless and cannot keep in one position.
300
BOOK II. XIII. 9-15
not be anxious. How could he ? Is any man in fear
about things that are not evil ?—No. —What then ? Is he in fear about things that are evil, indeed, but
that are in his own power to prevent?—Not at all.
—
If, then, things indifferent are neither good nor bad,
but all matters of moral purpose are under our
control, and no man can either take them away from
us, or bring upon us such of them as we do not wish,
what room is there left for anxiety ? Yet we are anxious about our wretched body, about our trifling
estate, about what Caesar will think, but are anxious
about none of the things that are within us. We are not anxious about not conceiving a false opinion, are we .'' —No, for that is under my control.—Or about
making a choice contrary to nature ?—No, not about
this, either.—Then, whenever you see a man looking
pale, just as the physician judging from the complexion
says, " This mans spleen is affected, and this man's liver," so do you also say, "This man's desire
and aversion are affected, he is not getting along well,
he is feverish." For there is nothing else that
changes a man's complexion, or makes him tremble,
or his teeth to chatter, or to " Shift from knee to knee and rest on either foot." ^ That is why Zeno was not anxious when he was
about to meet Antigonus ; for over none of the
things that Zeno regarded highly did Antigonus
have power, and what Antigonus did have power
over Zeno cared nothing about. But Antigonus was anxious when he was about to meet Zeno,
and very naturally so ; for he wanted to please him,
and that lay outside of his control ; yet Zeno did
not care about pleasing him, any more than any other
'^.^ ^<^
ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
€KeLv(p ovK rjdeXev, ov8e yhp aX\.o<; rt? Te')(yirr]^
16 '£706 aoi dpeaat OiXto ; avrl Tti'o? ; ol8a<; yap
TO, fierpa, Kad' a Kpiverai avOproiro'i utt' avdpoyTTOV
; fie/u,e\r]Ke^ aoi yvcovai , rt icrriv ayaOo^
avdpo)7ro<i Kal ri kuko^ koI ttux; eKarepov <yiyve17
rai ; hia rl ovv av ai/TO^ dyadb<; ovk el
;
—Ilct)?, ^rjcriv, ovk elpi
;
—'-'Otl ovheX^ dya06<; irevf^el ovBe (TTevd^et, ovSel<; ol/x(o^ec, ov8el<; ooxpta, Kal
Tpep^i ov8e Xeyei " ttco? fi aTrohe^erai, ttw? p^ou
18 uKOva-ei ;
' dvhpdirohov, co? dv avTq) Sokt}. ri ovv <7o\ p,e\ei irepl tmv dWorplcov ; vvv ovk
CKelvov d/jidpT7]p,d ecm to KaK(t)<; diroSe^acrOai ra vapa (tov ;—TTa)? yap ov ; —/^vvarai, K dWov
fiev elvat, dfidpTrjfia, dWov Be kukov ;—Ov.—Tt
19 ovv dycovia^ virep tcov dWorpLwv ; —Nar aW'
dywvcot), TTW? iyct) avrm \a\y]aci).—Etr' ovk
e^ecTTi yap co? ^eXei? avTW XaXijaac ; —'A\X,a
20 SeBocKa p,r] eKKpovadS). —M»; ri ypd<peiv /jeXXtov
TO Aici)vo<; 6vop.a BeSoiKa^ p,r) eKKpova0fj<; ; —
OvSap,(b^.—Tt TO OLTLov ; ovx OTt p.ep.e\erriKa<i
ypd(f)eiv ; —Ha)? yap ov ; —Tt 8' ; dvayiyvtoaKeiv
fieWcov ov)(^ QicravTco^ dv €t%69 ;—'ntrauT&j?.—Tt
TO OLTLOV ; OTt TTuaa Texvrj la-^vpov Tt e')(ei Kal
21 dappaXeov ev toi<; eavTT)<i. XaXecv ovv ov fj,ep,e- XertjKa^ ; Kal ri dXXo e/xeXeTa? ev ttj a-)(^oXfi
;
—
^yXXoyiapbov^i Kal fteTaTrtTTTOfTa?.
—
'Etti Tt;
* Schenkl : ni^t\(T-r)Kt S, 302
BOOK II. XIII. 15-21
artist cares about pleasing one who has no knowledge
of his art. Do I care to please you ? What do I gain thereby ? For do vc'U know the standards according to which
man is judged by man ? Have you been concerned
to know what a good man is. and wliat an evil man,
and how each becomes what he is? Why, then, are vou not a good man yourself?—How do you make
out, he answers, that I am not a good man ? —Why,
because no good man grieves or groans, no good
man laments, no good man turns pale and trembles,
or asks, " How will he receive me ? How will he
listen to me?" You slave! He will receive you
and listen to you as seems best to him. Why, then, are you concerned about things that are not your own?
Now is it not his own fault if he gives a bad reception
to what you have to say?—Of course. —Is it possible
for one man to make the mistake and yet another
suffer the harm?—No.—Why, then, are you anxious
over what is not your own ?—That is all very well,
but I am anxious over how I shall speak to him.
—
What, are you not privileged to speak to him as you
please? —Yes, but I am afraid that I shall be dis- concerted. —You are not afraid of being disconcerted
when you are about to write the name Dio, are you ? —No, not at all. — What is the reason ? Is it not that
you have practised writing?—Yes, of course. —What
then? If you were about to read something, would
you not feel the same way about it?—Quite the
same.—What is the reason ? Why, because everv art has an element of strength and confidence inside its own field. Have you, then, not practised speaking?
And what else did you practise in vour school ? —Syllogisms and arguments involving equivocal
303
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ou;!^ ft)(7T€ i/nrrelpax; SiaXiyeaOai ; ro S' i/nre[pa)<; e<TTiv ov'xl evKaip(ii<; koX d<T(f)a\.(a<; xal avverS)<;, ert h atrraKXTaif: koI aTrapaTroBia-Tcoi;, eTTi iraai
22 he TouTot? TeOappijKOTQ)^; ; —Nat.—'iTTTreu? ovv
b)v ei? irehiov i\r]\vdoi)<; 7rp6<; ttc^ov dycouia<;,
OTTOV av /ji€/j.e\€Tr)Ka<;, eKeivo^ 8' d/xeXeTtjro'i
eaiLv
;
—Nat* aWa e^oualav e;^ei aTroKTeivat
23 fi€.—Ae7e ovv to, dXrjdrj, BuaTijve, xal fir] dXa^ovevov
p-rjBe (f)iX6ao4>o<i elvac d^iov firjBe dyvoei
(Tov Toi)^ Kvpiov^, dXXa p.expi<; dv e-)(rj<; ravrr/v
TTjv Xa^rjv TTjv diro rov a(iip,aTO^, aKoXovOet
24 Travrl t^ l(T)(^upoT€pa>. Xeyecv 8e '^coKpaTTj'i i/xe- Xera o Trpo? Tov<i rvpdvvov^ outq)^ ZiaXeyofievo^;,
TTpos Toy? SfAracTTtt?, o iv t« h€(T/j,coTr)pia>.
Xeyecv Atoyevr]^ fie/neXeTijKei 6 Trpo? ^AXe^avSpov
ovTco<i XaXoJv. Trpot ^lXittttov, 6 irpo^- tou?
Treipard'i, o 7rpo<i rov divrjadfievov avrov ^ eKeivot^, ol? fie/xeXrjKev,^ rot? Oappovar av 6' eVt
rd (TavTOv ^dhi^e koX eKeivwv dTroaTfi<i fiTjEerroTe' et9 TTJV yroviav direXdoov Kadijao Kal TrXeKe
(TvXXoyiap.ov<i koX dXXm irpoTeive' 27 ovK ecTTi 5' iv crol TroXeo? ^ -qyefioyv dvrjp.
304
• The editors have noted a lacuna here.
• Schweighauser : /xf/xeKtrriKev S.
• C. Schenkl : v6\ea>s S.
BOOK II. XIII. 21-27
premisses. —To what end .'* Was it not to enable you
to conduct an argument skilfully? And does not
"skilfully" mean seasonably and securely and
intelligently, and, more than that, without making
mistakes and without embarrassment, and, in addition
to all this, with confidence ? —Surely.—Well then, if you are on horseback and have ridden out upon the
plain against a man who is on foot, are you in anxiety,
assuming that you are in practice and the other is not?—Yes, that is all very well, but Caesar has
authority to put me to death. —Then tell the truth,
wretch, and do not brag, nor claim to be a philosopher, nor fail to recognize your masters ; but as long as you let them have this hold on you through your
body, follow everyone that is stronger than you are. But Socrates used to practise speaking to some purpose—Socrates, who discoursed as he did to the
Tyrants,^ to his judges, and in the prison. Diogenes
had practised speaking—Diogenes, who talked to Alexander as he did, to Philip, to the pirates, to the
man who had bought him . . . [Leave such matters]
to those who are seriously interested in them, to the
brave ; but do you walk away to your own concerns and never depart from them again; go into your
corner and sit down, and spin syllogisms and
propound them to others : " In thee the State hath found no leader true." ^
^ The "Thirty Tyrants." who ruled in Athens a short while before the death of Socrates.
* A verse of unknown authorship.
305
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
i8'. ri/oo? NdaoDva.
1 EtcreX^oi'TO? Tivo<i tmv 'VwfiaiKwv /j-era viov
Kai eiraKovovrof; ki'0<i ava<yv(JoaixaTo^; Ouro'i, ecprj, 6 TpoTTO? earl t^9 BtSaaKaXLa<i Koi aTreaLcoTrrjaev.
2 d^iovvTO<i S' exeivou e'upelv rd e^rjf, Koirov ex^i,
e^>/, irdaa re^vrj tm ISkottj Kai direipa) avrfj<i, 3 orav TrapaStScorai. koi rd fiev utto tcjv Te')(yoiv
^iv6ix€va rrjv re y^pelav evOv^ ivBeiKwrat irpo'i o 'yeyovev kol rd TrXelaTU avroyv 6%€4 rt koX aywyov
4 KoX eTTL-^apL. Kai ydp aKVT€v<i 7rco<i fiev fiav6dvei Ti<i •napelvaL koi TrapaKoXovdelv aTepire^,^ to h vtto5
Srjfia 'y^pi'jcnpLov koi Ihelv aX.X&)9 ovk di}he<i. Kai
reKTOVO'i r) fxev fiddijai^ dviapa fxdXiara tu> IBimtt]
iraparvy^^dvovTi, to S' epyov imSeiKwcn t)]v
6 ypeiav t?}? Te)(^v'>]<;. ttoXv 8e jxaWov eVt /jLovcrtKfj<t
oyfrei avro' dvydp irapfj^; tw 8i8aaKo/j,€PO),(f)aveiTai
act iravTcov aTepTreaTarov to /j,d6i]/jia, rd puivToi
dirb T^<? fjLOucnKrj<; r^hea Kai iiriTepTrij toI^ iSiioTaif
uKoveiv.
7 Kai ivTavda to fxev epyov tov <f)i\oau(f)ouvTO'i
TOiovTov Tt (jiavra^ofieda, otc Bei rrjv uvtov
^ouXrjaiv avvapp^oaat toF? yivofievoc^, d)<i pijre ti
Tcov yivo/x6V(ov uKOVTcov Tjp,o)v yiveadai, firjre tmv
8 fiT} yivofievoiv OeXovTcov r}p,ci)V p,r) yivecrOai. i^ ov
trepUcTTi, Tot9 crvaTr](Ta/j,€voi<i avro ev ope^et pb-q
^ Upton : avf)evfs S.
1 Apparently named Naso, to judge from the title to this chapter. A Julius Naso, the son of a man of letters, is mentioned not infrequently in the correspondence of the younger Pliny. See Frosop. Imp. Romani, II. p. 202, no. 293. 306
BOOK II. XIV. 1-8
CHAPTER XIV
To Naso
Once when a certain Roman citizen * accompanied
by his son had come in and was listening to one of
his readings, Epictetus said : This is the style of my
teaching, and then lapsed into silence. But when
the other requested to know what came next, he
replied : Instruction in the technique of any art is boring to the layman who has had no experience in
it. Now the products of the arts show immediately
their use towards the purpose for which they are made, and most of them possess also a certain
attractiveness and charm. For example, to stand by
and watch the process by which a shoemaker learns
his trade is, indeed, not pleasant, yet the shoe is useful and not an unpleasant thing to look at either. And the process of education in the case of a carpenter is especially tiresome to the layman who
happens to be watching, but the work which the
carpenter does shows the use of his art. You will find the same much more true in the case of music
;
for if you are standing by when someone is taking a
lesson, the process of instruction will strike you as the most unpleasant of all, yet the results of music
are sweet and pleasing to the ear of the layman.
So also in our own case, we picture the work of
the philosopher to be something like this : He should
bring his own will into harmony with what happens,
so that neither anything that happens happens
against our will, nor anything that fails to happen
fails to happen when we wish it to happen. The
result of this for those who have so ordered the work
307
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
aTTOTvyy^dvetv, iv eKKXicrei, 8e fMt) TrepnTLirreiv,
aXv7ra)<;, a^o^w^, aTapd'yco'; SL€^dy€Ci> KaO^ avrov
fiera rwv koivcovcov rrjpovvTa Ta<; a-)(eaet<; ra? re
(f)vcn/ca<i Kol i-mOeTovi, top vlov, top nuTepa, top
d8e\(f)6p, TOP TToXLTrjv, top dpSpa, ttjp yvpaixa,
top yeiTopa, top (tvpoSop, top dp-^opTa, top
dp^opepop.
9 To epyop tov (f)i\o(TO())ovPTo<i tolovtop ti (paPTal^opeOa.
Xonrop e^ef/}? tovto) ^rjTOVp^p, ttm^
10 e.(TTat TOVTO. op6)p,ep ovp oti 6 T€/ct(op p,aOoop rwa
yiPCTai T€KTQ}p, 6 KvBeppijTTfj'i paddop Tipa yiveTai
Kvj3€pP7]T7]f;. fx^ ttot' ovp Koi epOdSe ovk drrapKel
TO ^ouXeaOai kuXop kol tyadop yepeaOai, y^peia
he Kai p^adetp tipu ; triTovpep ovp Tipa Tavra.
11 Xeyovaip oi (f)iX6(TO(poi, otl padelp Set irpwTOP
TOVTO, OTI €<TTl ^609 Kal TTpOPOei T(OP oXcOP Kol
OVK ecTTL XaOeip avrop ov p,6pop iroiovpTa, aXX'
ovhe Biapoovpepop rj evOvp^ovpepop' cItu ttoIol
12 TiV€<; elatp. oloi yap dp eKeiPoi evpedSxrip, top
eKeipoL<i dpeaopTa koX TreicrdriaopLevop dpayxi]
13 TreipdaOai kutu Bvpapip e^opbOiovadaL eKCiPoi^- el TTLaTOP i(TTl TO dciOP, Kal TOVTOP clpUl TTKTTOP- €L eXevOepop, Kal tovtop eXevOepop' el evepysTiKOP,
Kal TovTOP evepycTiKOP' el peyaXo^pop, Kai tovtop
/jieyaX6(f)popa' &><? deov toLpvp ^tjXcottjp to, 6^j}<? irdpTa Kal iroielp Kal Xeyeiv.
14 Ilo^ei' ovp dp^aadat, Set;—-"Av <rvyKaO^^, epoi
308
BOOK II. XIV. 8-14
of philosophy is that in desire they are not dis- appointed, and in aversion they do not fall into what
they would avoid ; that each person passes his life to himself, free from pain, fear, and perturbation, at the same time maintaining with his associates both the
natural and the acquired relationships, those namely
of son, father, brother, citizen, wife, neighbour,
fellow-traveller, ruler, and subject.
Something like this is our picture of the work of
the philosopher. The next thing after this is that
we seek the means of achieving it. We see, then,
that the carpenter becomes a carpenter by first learning something, the helmsman becomes a helmsman
by first learning something. May it not be,
then, that in our case also it is not sufficient to wish
to become noble and good, but that we are under
the necessity of learning something first.'' We
seek, then, what this is. Now the philosophers say
that the first thing we must learn is this : That
there is a God, and that He provides for the
universe, and that it is impossible for a man to conceal from Him, not merely his actions, but even
his purposes and his thoughts. Next we must learn
what the gods are like ; for whatever their
character is discovered to be, the man who is going
to please and obey them must endeavour as best he
can to resemble them. If the deity is faithful, he
also must be faithful ; if free, he also must be free
;
if beneficent, he also must be beneficent ; if highminded,
he also must be high-minded, and so forth ; therefore, in everything he says and does, he must
act as an imitator of God.
Where, then, ought I to start?—If you enter
upon this task, I will say that in the first place you
309
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
croi OTt TrpMTOv Set ere rot? 6v6/j.acn irapaKoXovOelv. —" VlaT iyci) vvv ov TrapaKoXovdco rot? ovoixaaiv;
15 —Ov TT apaKoXovdel<;
.
—IIw? ovv 'x^pSifxai aurot?;
—
Oi/Ta)<» 0)9 ol dypdfXfiaToi rah iyypap.p.ciToi^
<^o)vai<;, o)9 TCL KTr]V7) rat? (pavraa-Lai'i' aWo yap
16 e<TTt ')^pr](Ti<;, dWo 'napaico\ov6rj(TL<;. el S" oiei irapaKo\ov6elv, cfie'pe o d€\ei<f opo/xa koI ^aaavi17
awfxev avTOV<;, el tt apaKo\ov9ovp-ev.—'AW' dviapov
TO e^eXiyx^adai irpea^vrepov dvOpwirov tjSt] KCLV ovT(o<; TV)(r} rd<i tpel<; arpareiwi ecrTparevpievov.
18 —OtSa Kaycii. vvv yap av eXi'fKvOa^i Trpo^ ip.e a)?
/jir]8ev6<i Seo/tevo?. rlvo^ 5' av Kal (f)avTaa6eir]^
a)<? evheovTO<; ; irXovrel^, rcKva e%ef9, tv^^ov koI
yvvalKa, icaX olK€Ta<; 7roX,Xou9, 6 Kaiadp ae olhev,
iv 'PwpLTj TToWovt; (f)lXov<; KeKTTjcTai, TO, KaOi^Kovra
diTohihw;, olha<i rov ev iroiovvTa dvTevTroirjaac Kai
19 Tov KaKOi<i TTOLOvvra KaKOi^ Trotrjcrai. tl croi XeiTre/; av ovv croi Bel^co, on rd dvayKatorara /cat, fieyicTTa 7r/0O9 evSaip-oviav, koI oti p-e')(pi Bevpo
TrdvTcov p,dX\ov rj tmv TrpoarjKovrwv e7ripc€p,e\v(Tai,
Kal rov KoXocjioiyva imOSi'^ ovt€tl deo'i ecrriv olSa<i
^ Upton's " codex ": irelOte S.
^ By the municipal law of Caesar (C. l.L. V, 593 = Dessau,
Iiiscr. Lat. 6085, § 89), a man to be eligible to tlie Senate of a municipality must have served three campaigns in the
cavalry, or six in the infantry, and it is probable that this provision is referred to here. Cf. IV. 1, 37-40, and on
the tres milUiae equestres see Mommsen : Romischcs S/aatxro-ht,
III. (1887), 54R, n. 2-4 ; 549, n. 1. On the other hand the
scholiast (probably Arethas, see Schenkl, pp. Ixxii. ff.) on § 17 apparently took this to mean that Naso had once been a commanding officer (for the corrupt 5(^ Thv &(rwva
\iyei K.r,\., one ought probably to read something like 310
BOOK II. XIV. 14-19
ought to understand the meaning of terms.—So you
imply that I do not now understand the meaning of
terms?—You do not.—How comes it, then, that I use them ?—Why, you use them as the illiterate use written speech, as the cattle use external impressions
; for use is one thing, and understanding
another. But if you think you understand terms,
propose any term you please, and let us put
ourselves to the test, to see whether we understand
it. —But it is unpleasant to be subjected to an
examination when one is already somewhat advanced
in years, and, if it so chance, has served his three campaigns.^—I realize that myself. For now
you have come to me like a man who stood in need
of nothing. But what could anyone even imagine
you to be in need of? You are rich, you have
children, possibly also a wife, and many slaves
;
Caesar knows you, you have many friends in Rome,
you perform the duties incumbent upon you, and
when a man has done you either good or harm you
know how to pay him back in kind. What do
you still lack ? If, therefore, I show you that what
you lack are things most necessary and important
for happiness, and that hitherto you have devoted
your attention to everything but what was appropriate
for you to do, and if I add the colophon,*
ffTpmrjjyhv tiaffaiva Xry»i, ^v yap tuv /xeydXuv rTJs 'P(in7)s), although this can hardly have been more than a guess on his
part.
* » e. the finishing touch ; a word (sometimes flerived from
the ancient city Colophon because of a tradition that its efficient cavalry gave the finishing stroke in every war in which it was engaged [Strabo, XIV. i, 28], but more
probablj' a common noun in the sense of "tip," "summit,"
"finishing point,") used to indicate the title and other
explanatory data when entered at the end of a work.
3"
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
OUT€ TL avOpM7rO<i OVT€ TL UyadoV OVT€ Tl KUKOV,
20 Kal TO fiev rwv aWwv tVco? aveKJov, on S' avro^; avrov dyvoeh, ircix; Bvvaaai di aa)(^eaOat fxov Kal
21 vrrocT'^eiv rov eXey)(^ov Kal Trapajxeivai ; ov8a/xot}<i,
aX.\' €v$v^ airaWdaa-r] ^aXeTTco? e)((tiv. KaLTOi tl act iyoi kukov TreTTolrjKa ; el fxrj Kal to eaOTnpov
T« alaxpa>, otl heiKvvet avrov uvtm oIo? icrrcv el
fiT] Kal 6 larpo<i tov voaovvra v^pl^ei,^ orav etirr)
avTO) " dvdpwTre, 8oKel<i /j^rjBev e)(^€iv, 7rvp€(Taei<; Be' datTTjcrov (Tr]p.epov, vhojp Trte*" Kal ovhel<i Xiyei " c5 22 8eiV7]<i v/3p€co<;.^^ eav he rivi etiTrj<; " at 6pe^ei<; aov
• (f>\ey/j.aivova-iv, at eKKXicrei^ Taireivai elcriv, al
eTTL^oXal dvopLoXoyovfievat, at opfial da-vfKfxovai
rf) (^vaei, al vTToXi'jyjreif; elKalai Kal e\frev(Tfievac"
evdv^ i^eXOcov Xeyei " v^piaev fxe. 23 Toiavrd eari rd rffxerepa co? ev navrjyvpec. rd
fiev KTr)V7] TrpaOrjao/u-eva dyerai Kal ol /9o69, oi he
iroXXdi Toiv dvdpcoTrcav ol fiev divrjcrofievoi oi Se
ira>\r]aovTe^' dXiyoi Be rive<i elcriv ol Kara deav
ip)(^6/j,€vot tt}? iravijyvpeo}^, ttw? tovto ylverat. koI
Bid Tt Kal Tfcj/e? ol Ti0€vre<; rrjv iravrjyvpiv Kal eirl 24 TLVL. ovTco'i Kal evOdh^ ev Tjj Travrjyvpei ravrrj' ol
jxev Ttve? CO? kti^vij ovBevirXeov TroXvirpayixovoixTL rov yopTov ocroi ydp irepl Krriaiv Kat dypou^ koI
olKeTa<i Kal dp)(^d<; Tiva<i dvaaTpe<^ea6e, ravra
26 ovBev dXXo rj ')(opTO<t earlv oXlyoi B elcriv oi iravr)-
yupi^ovTe<i dvOpwnov (f)iXodedfxove<;. " tl ttot
^ C. Schenkl: otuv avrhv v^piCvi- S (the first two words
deleted in the Cambridge ed. of 1655).
^ A famous comparison, ascribed to Pythagoras. See Cicero,
I'uifctil. Di^p. V. 9 ; Diog. Laert. VIII. 8 ; lamblichus, Vita
Pythayori, 58. Cf. Menander, frg. 481k (Allinson, p. 442).
312
BOOK II. XIV. 19-25
saying : You know neither what God is, nor what
man is, nor what good, nor what evil is—if I say
that you are ignorant of these other matters you
may possibly endure that; but if I say that you do
not understand your own self, how can you possibly
bear with me, and endure and abide my questioning
? You cannot do so at all, but immediately you
go away offended. And yet what harm have I done
you ? None at all, unless the mirror also does harm
to the ugly man by showing him what he looks
like ; unless the physician insults the patient, when
he says to him, " Man, you think there is nothing
the matter with you ; but you have a fever ; fast to-dav and drink only water " ; and no one says, " What dreadful insolence ! " Yet if you tell a man,
"Your desires are feverish, your attempts to avoid
things are humiliating, your purposes are inconsistent,
your choices are out of harmony with your
nature, your conceptions are hit-or-miss and false,"
whv, immediately he walks out and says, " He
insulted me."
Our position is like that of those who attend a
fair.^ Cattle and oxen are brought there to be sold,
and most men engage in buying and selling, while
there are onlv a few who go merely to see the fair,
how it is conducted, and why, and who are promoting
it, and for what purpose. So it is also in this "fair" of the world in which we live; some
persons, like cattle, are interested in nothing but
their fodder ; for to all of you that concern yourselves
with property and lands and slaves and one
office or another, all this is nothing but fodder
!
And few in number are the men who attend the
fair because they are fond of the spectacle. " What,
VOL. L M 313
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovv iariv o K6a-fio<i, rt? avrov Siockci. ovSei^ ; 26 KUk irS)^ olov re troXw fiev rj oIkov fir) SuvaaOai
Siafievecv firjS' okiyoaTov y^povov hiya tov Bioi- KOVVTO^ KoX €7ri/J,€XofJ,eVOU, TO 8' OUTft)? ficja Kol
Kokov KUTacrKeuaa-fia ecKfj kuI o)? ervyev ovrw^
27 efTttACTft)? ^ oLKovofieia-Oai ; eariv ovv 6 Scoikcov. irolo^ T<9 Kai ttS)^ o Sioikcov ; ijfieii; Se Tive^ 6pt€<;
utt' auTov yeyovafi€v koI tt/jo? ri epyov ; apd y
€XO/J.ev Tiva i-ntTrXoKrjv 7rpo<i avrov koX <rx^o-iv rj 28 ouSepiav
;
" ravT eariv a irdcrxpva-Lv ovroi oi oXiyor Kai Xonrov rovrm fi6vq> crxoXd^ovai rw
29 Tr]v Traviyyvpiv i<nopr)aavra<i^ direXdelv. rl ovv ; KarayeXSiVTai. vrro twv iroXXcov koI yap eKel ol dearal viro twv ip,Tr6pcov' Kal el to, kt)Jvt} avvaiadrjaiv
Tiva elx^v, KareyiXa av ^ tmv aXXo ri
TeOavfxaKOTav rj tov xoprov.
i€ . 11/30? Toi)^ (TKXrjpat^ naiv S)v e/cpivav
eppevovra^.
Orav aKovaoiCTi Tive^; tovtcov roiv Xoycov, on
fie^aiov elvai Set /cat j) fiev 7rpoaip€(Tt<i eXevdepov
<f>V(rei Kal dvavdyKaarov, rd S' dXXa KtoXvrd,
^ Bentley : iniKrus S. * Salmasius: iffTop-ficravr' S.
* Added by Upton from his "codex."
314
BOOK II. XIV. 25-xv. I
then, is the universe," they ask, "and who governs
it ? No one ? Yet how can it be that, while it is impossible for a city or a household to remain even
a very short time without someone to govern and
care for it, nevertheless this great and beautiful
structure should be kept in such orderly arrangement
by sheer accident and chance? There must
be, therefore, One who governs it. What kind of
a being is He, and how does He govern it? And
what are we, who have been created by Him, and
for what purpose were we created? Do we, then,
really have some contact and relation with Him
or none at all ? " That is the way these few are
affected ; and thenceforward they have leisure for this one thing only—to study well the "fair"
of life before they leave it. With what result,
then? They are laughed to scorn by the crowd,
quite as in the real fair the mere spectators are laughed at by the traffickers ; yes, and if the
cattle themselves had any comprehension like ours of what was going on, they too would laugh at those who had wonder and admiration for anything
but their fodder
!
CHAPTER XV
To those mho cling obstinately to the JudgemetiU
which they have once fanned
Some men, when they hear the following precepts : That one ought to be steadfast, and that the moral
purpose is naturally free and not subject to compulsioiij
while everything else is liable to inter315
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ava'^Kacrrd, SovXa, aWorpca, (fiavrd^ovTai on
Set iravTi tcS Kpidevrt, vir avrSiv dTrapa^aTax;
2 ififieveiv. dWa irpSiTov v<yie<i elvai Bel to xexpifievov.
6e\co yap elvai rovov; iv aco/jLaTi, aXV
3 CO? vyialvovTi, cb? ddXovpTt' dv Be /xoi (f>p€ViTiKov
Tovov<; exa>v evBeiKvvr} xal dXa^ovevrj ctt avrol<i,
ipSi aoi OTi " dvdpwne, ^i]Tet top depairevo'ovTa.
TOVTO ovK elal tovol, dXX' dTOvia.^^
4 'Krepov TpoTTOv roiovrov rt Kal eVl t^9 '^^XV'*
irda-xova-iv ol irapaKOvovTe'i rcov Xoyoov tovtwv.
olov /cat efio<; ti<; eracpo^ i^ ovBcfiidf; alrLa<; expi5
vev diTOKapTepelv. eyvcov iyoi '^Brj Tpiryv ^/xepav
e^ovTO^ avTOv Trj<; aTro;^*}? Kal iXdcov eirvvdavo6
iJ.r}v TV iyeveTo.—KivpiKa, (jjrjcrCv. —'AW' 6p.oi<; Tt ae rjv TO dvaireicrav ; el yap opd(b<; €Kpiva<i,
IBov irapaKadrjfieOd aoi Kul avvepyov/xev, 'iv
7 i^e\6r}(;' el 8' dX6y(o<; €Kpiva<i, p^rdOov.—T049
KpiOelacv ififievecv Bel. —Tt TTotet?, dvOpwire ; ov
irdaiv, dXkd Tol<i 6p6S><i. CTrel iradwv dpTi oti
vv^ ecTTiv, dv aoL Bokj}, fir) p,eTarideao, dXV
efip.eve Kal Xeye otc toI<; Kpidelaiv ifipbeveiv Bel.
8 ov 6e\ei<i TTjv dp^^^rjv aTTjcrai Kal tov 0efieXiov,
TO Kpip.a (TKeyjraadai, iroTepov vyie<; fj ou% vyie<;,
Kal oyxft)? XotTTOV eiroi.KoBop.elv avTw ttjv ev9
Toviav, TTjv d(r<f)dXeiav ; dv Be aairpov viroorTrjarj
316
BOOK 11. XV. 1-9
ference and compulsion, subject to others and not
our own—some men, I say, fancy that whenever
they have formed a judgement they ought to stand
by it immovably. And yet the first requirement is that the judgement formed be a sound one. For
I want vigour in the body, but it must be the
vigour of the body in a state of health and physical
exercise ; whereas, if you show me that you possess
the vigour of a madman, and boast about it, 1 will say to you, " Man, look, for someone to cure you.
This is not vigour, but feebleness."
The following is another way in which the minds
of those are affected who hear these precepts amiss.
For example, a friend of mine for no reason at all made up his mind to starve himself to death I learned about it when he was already in the third
day of his fasting, and went and asked what had
happened.—I have decided, he answered. —Very
well, but still what was it that induced you to make
up your mind ? For if your judgement was good, see, we are at your side and ready to help you to make
your exit from this life ; but if your judgement was
irrational, change it. —I must abide by my decisions. —Why, man, what are you about? You mean not
all your decisions, but only the right ones. For
example, if you are convinced at this moment that
it is night, do not change your opinion, if that seems
best to you, but abide by it and say that you ought
to abide by your decisions ! Do you not wish to make your beginning and your foundation firm, that
is, to consider whether your decision is sound or unsound, and only after you have done that proceed
to rear thereon the structure of your determination
and your firm resolve ? But if you lay a rotten and
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
xal Karairlirrov, ovk ocKoSo/jLrjfiaTiov,^ oaqt 8 av irXelova koI la-)(vp6r€pa €7nOfj<i, roa-ovTm
10 daTTOv KUTevexdv'^STai. avev Trda-rj'; ania^i
i^d<yei<i tj/jlIv dvdpcoTTov ix rov ^ijv (^l\ov kuI
avpijdr], T^9 avTrj<; iroXeox; ttoXitt/v koI t^9
11 /ii€ydX7}<i Kal T^<? ixLicpa<i' elra (f)6vov ipya^o/xevof;
/cal aTroWvoDV dvOpwrrov fiTjSev r/SiKrjKora X€y€i<i 12 on TOt? KpiOeiaLV ifi/xevecv Bee. el 8' iirrfKdev
<Toi TTco? ttot' eyu.6 aTTOKTelvai, eBei ae efijxeveiv
Tol<; Kpidetacv ; 13 'E/cetyo9 fjLev ovv fi6yi<i pLereTreiadri. tS)v he vvv Tiva<i OVK ecTTi ixeradelvai. ware /xoi hoKM
o rrporepov rjyvoovv vvv elBevai, n ecni ro iv rrj
arvviideia \€y6p,€vov fiwpov ovre Treicai ovre
14 prj^ai eanv. firj fioi yevotro (plXov e^^iv aocpov
ficopov. Bvaixerax^ipKTTorepov ^ ovhev icrTtv. " K€KpiKa" Kal yap ol fiaLvopievoi' a\X' oaw
^e^aiorepov Kpivovai rd ovk ovra, roaovra>
16 irXeiova iWe^opov Beovrai. ov 6iX€i<i Ta rov
voaovvro<i Trocelv Kal rov larpov vapaKaXelv
;
" voaoi, Kvpie- ^orjdrjaov fiot. Tt p.e Set iroielv
16 aKeyjrar ip,6v ean treidecrdai aot. ' ovTayj Kal
evraiiO^' " d Bel fie Troielv ovk olBa, iX?]Xv6a
Se /j,adr)a-6fjLevo<i." ov, dXXd " Trepl tmv dXXcov
^ C. Schenkl and Elter: olKol6fjL-rijxd n ov S. Perhaps ovk
(or oh Kol) oiKoZof^rtTeov (or oiKoSofiriTtoy rl) after Schegk.
* Wolf : SvffijLfTax(ip'<^'''ov S.
1 That is, the Universe, in Stoic parlance.
* Is amenable neither to reason nor force ; will neither bend nor break.
BOOK II. XV. 9-16
crumbling foundation, you cannot rear thereon even
a small building, but the bigger and the stronger
your superstructure is the more quickly it will fall down. Without any reason you are taking out of
this life, to our detriment, a human being who is a familiar friend, a citizen of the same state, both
the large state ^ and the small ; and then, though
in the act of murder, and while engaged in the
destruction of a human being that has done no wrong, you say that you " must abide by
your decisions " I But if the idea ever entered
your head to kill me, would you have to abide by
your decisions?
Well, it was hard work to persuade that man
;
but there are some men of to-day whom it is im
possible to move. So that I feel that I now know
what I formerly did not understand—the meaning
of the proverb, " A fool you can neither persuade
nor break." ^ God forbid that I should ever have
for a friend a wise fool ! ^ There is nothing harder
to handle. "I have decided," he says! Why yes,
and so have madmen ; but the more firm their
decision is about what is false, the more hellebore * they need. Will you not adt like a sick man, and
summon a physician? "I am sick, sir; help me.
Consider what I ought to do ; it is my part to obey
you." So also in the present instance. " I know
not what I ought to be doing, but I have come to
find out." Thus one should speak. No, but this
is what one hears, " Talk to me about anything else,
* A loquacious and argumentatively stubborn person. In
the original this sentence makes a trimeter scazon, and hence
is probably a quotation from some satirical poem.
* Commonly used in antiquity as a remedy for insanity.
3»9
ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
17 /Ltoi \eye' tovto Be /ccKpiKa." irepl iroioiv aXkav
;
tI <ydp i(TTi fiei^ov tj TrpovpyiaLTepov tov irei- adrjvai ae, cm, ovk apKel to KeKpiKevai Koi to
fir] fMCTadecrdai ; ovTOi oi fiaviKol tovoi, ovx
18 vyieivoi. " airodavelv deXw, dv fi€ tovto dvayKuat]^"
Sid Tt, dvdpcoTre ; tl eyiveTO ; " Ke- KpiKa^ iadoOrjv, OTi ov KeKpiKa<i ifie diroKTeivai.
19 " dpyvpiov ov Xafi^dpco." Std tl ; " KeKpiKa.'
X<t6i, OTt c5 TOVO) VVV ')(pfj TT/DO? TO /XT) \afl0dv€lV,
ovSev KcoXvei ae aK.oy(xi<i ttotc piyjrai 7rpo<i to
\afx,0dveiv Kol irdkiv Xeyetv on " KeupiKa,
20 oiairep ev voarovvTL koX pevfiaTt^ofiepo) aoifiaTL TTore p,€V eTTt tuvtu ttotc S' eV ivelva peTret
TO pevfia. ovTco^ koX daOevr)^ "^^XV' ottov fiev k\[v€1, dBrjXov e%ei' otuv Be koI Tovo<i irpocrfj
TO) KKifxaTL TOVTW Kal TTJ <f)opa, TOT€ yiverai
TO KUKOV d^orjOriTOV koX ddepd-nevTOV.
i^'. "Oti ov fieXeTco/j-ev xpriaOai Tot? irept
dyaOoiv koX kukcov Boyp-aaiv.
1 Wov TO dyadov ;—'Ei/ irpoaipea-ei. —Ylov to
KUKOV ; —'Ei^ irpoaipeaet. —Tiov to ovBhepov ;—
2 'Ev Tot? dirpoatpeTot^;.—Tt ovv ; p,ip,vy]TaL Tt?
rip,(t)v e^co TovTMV t(ov Xoycov ; peXeTo, Tt? avTO<;
' Of. § 12 above.
' Probably ihe criticism of some Cynic philosopher
addressed to Epictetus.
320
BOOK II. XV. I6-XVI. 2
but on this point I have made my decision." " Anything
else " indeed ! Why, what is more important
or more to your advantage than to be convinced
that it is not sufficient for a man merely to have
reached decisions, and to refuse to change ? These
are the sinews of madness, not health. " If you
force me to this, I would gladly die." What for,
man ? What has happened ? "I have decided I " It was fortunate for me that you did not decide
to kill me ! ^ Or again, another says, " I take no money for my services."^ Why so? "Because
I have decided." Rest assured that there
is nothing to prevent you from some day turning
irrationally to taking money for your services, and
that with the same vehemence with which you now
refuse to take it, and then saying again, "' I have
decided "
; precisely as in a diseased body, suffering
from a flux, the flux inclines now in this direction
and now in that. Such is also the sick mind ; it
is uncertain which way it is inclined, but when
vehemence also is added to this inclination and
drift, then the evil gets past help and past cure."
CHAPTER XVI
That we do not practise the application of our judgements about things good and evil Wherein lies the good ?—In moral purpose.
—
Wherein lies evil?—In moral purpose. —Wherein
lies that which is neither good nor evil ?—In the
things that lie outside the domain of moral purpose. —Well, what of it? Does any one of us remember
these statements outside the classroom ? Does any
321
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
€^ avTOV rovTov top rpoirov aTTOKpivea-dai toU
irpdyfiaaiv (u? ctti T<av epwTrjfjLdTwv ; " apd ye
r]p,epa iariv ; " " vai." " tL he ; vv^ ecrriv ;
'" " ou." " Tt 3'; aprioi elaiv ol ao-Te'/je? ; " " ovk
3 ex^fo Xeyeiv. ' orao aoi _7rpo(f>aLVT]Tai dpyvpiov,
p,€fi€XeT>)Ka<i aTroKptvecrdat rijv Seoucrav dtroKpiaiv,
OTt " OVK dyadov "
; -tjaKriKaf; ev TavTai<i rah
i diTOKpicrecnv rj tt/jo? fj,6va ra ao(j)lafiara ; ri ovv
davp,d^ei<i, el, oirov fiev fx.€fi€XeTT]/ca<;, exec Kpeirrwv
yeprj aeavrov, oirov S' dfieXenJTox; e;^e{9, 5 exec 8' 6 avT6<; Biap,eveL<i ; etrel hua ri 6 ptJTcop
etSci)? oTi yeypa(f>€ kuXocs, on dveiXrj^e to. yeypap,p,eva, (provrjv elacfiepwv r)helav 6fX(os en
6 ayoovia ; oti ovk apKelrai rut /xeXeTPjaai. ri ovv
BeXei ; eTraipedPjvai inro ro>v TrapouTwv. npo<; fiev ovv to hvvaaOai /xeXerdv qaKvrai, 7rpo9 eiraivov
7 8e Kol ylroyov ovk i'jaKrjTai. irore yap qKovcrev
irapa nvo<:, n ecrnv €7raivo<i,^ ri ecrn yfr6yo<i, Tt? eKurepov (f)V(n<i ; Tov<i iroiovi rcov eTraivcov
Sia)KT€ov rj Tot/9 TTOLOV^ TMv yjroyajv (f)evKTeov ; ttotc
S' ifieXerrjaev ravrrjv ttjv /xeXeTrjv aKoXovOov
8 TOUTOt? TOi? X6yoi<i ; ri ovv en Bav/xd^ei^, el, oirov fjLCV e/jLadev, eKel 8ia(f>€pei t(ov dXXcov, ottov
6' ov fie/j-eXeTrjKev, eKel rot? 7roXXoc<i 6 avro^;
9 ecTTiv ; a»< o KiOaprp8o<: olhev KtOapi^eiv, aSei
KaXo!)<i, crrarov e^^t. xaXov Kal op.(o<; el(Tep')(^6p.evo<;
rpep-ec tuvtu yap olSev, 6)(Xo<; Be tl ianv ovk
^ ri ia%iv itraivos added by Wolf.
^ The answers to these questions are obvious and are given without liesitation. Questions about the facts of life, about good and evil, like the following, should be answered
with equal promptness and conviction. 32a
BOOK II. XVI. 2-9 one of us'when by himself practise answering facts in the way he answers these questions ? " So it is day,
is it?" "Yes." "What then? Is it night?" "No."
"What then? Is the number of the stars even?"
"I cannot say." ^ When you are shown money,
have you practised giving the proper answer, namely,
that it is not a good thing? Have you trained
yourself in answers of this kind, or merely to answer
sophisms? Why, then, are you surprised to find
that in the fields in which you have practised you
surpass yourself, but in that in which you have not
practised you remain the same? For why is it that
the orator, although he knows that he has composed
a good speech, has memorized what he has written
and is bringing a pleasing voice to his task, is still anxious despite all that? Because he is not satisfied with the mere practice of oratory. What, then,
does he want? He wants to be praised by his audience Now he has trained himself with a view to being able to practise oratory, but he has not trained
himself with reference to praise and blame. For
when did he ever hear any one say what praise is, what blame is, and what is the nature of each?
What kinds of praise are to be sought, and what
kinds of blame are to be avoided ? And when did
he ever go through this course of training in accord- ance with these principles? Why, then, are you
any longer surprised because he surpasses all others in the field in which he has studied, but in that in which
he has not practised he is no better than the multitude?
He is like a citharoede who knows how to play to the harp, sings well, has a beautiful flowing
gown, and still trembles when he comes upon the
stage ; for all that has gone before he knows, but
323
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
10 olSep ou8' o)(\ov jSoT) ovSe KardyeXco';. aXX' ouS'
avTo TO ayoyvidv rt eariv olSev, irorepov rjjjiirepov
epyov iarlv rj aWorpiov, eanv avro Travaai rj ovK ecTTiv. Sta tovto iav fiev iiratvedfj, (pvaijOeh
i^TjXdev iav 8e KarayeXaadfj, to (f)va-7)- fiuTtov eKelvo ixevTijOT] koI TrpoaeKaOiaev.
11 ToiovTov Tt Kal rjfi€t<; tt da'X^ofiev . Tiva Oavfid^ofiev
; to, e/cro?. irepl riva a7rovBd^o/iev
;
irep\ TO, iKTO<:. elr diropovfjiev, 'rroi<i (fio^ovfieOa
12 rj TTew? dycovicofiev ; ri ovv 6/'Se;^eTai, orav to. i7ri(t>€po/xeva kuku rjyco/jieda ; ov Suvdp.eOa fjurj 13 ^oBetadai, ov Svvdfieda firj dycovidv. eira Xeyofjuev
" Kvpie o Oea, 7r<u9 P'l] dywviw ; " p^aype,
')(elpa<i OVK e')(ei^ ; ovk eTToirjcrev aoi avTd<; 6 0e6<i ; ev^ov vvv Kadrjpevo<i, oircoij ai p,v^ai crov p,T} pecoaiv d7r6p,v^at p^dXkov Kal p,r) iyKdXet. tL ovv ; 14 evTUvdd aoi ovhev SeScoKev ; ov SeScoKC croi Kaprepiav,
ov BiSayKe croi peyaXo-^v^Lav, ov BeStoKev
dvSpelav ; rr)XiKavTa<i e^f^v ')(€ipa<; en f^/rei? 15 Tov dirop^v^ovTa ; dXX ovhe p.eXeTS)p,ev ravra
oi/B' e7riarp€(f>6p.€6a. CTrel Botc p,oi eva, m p,eX€i
TTco? Tt TToc^ar), 09 iiTiaTpeckerai ov tov Tvxelv
Tiva, dXXd Trj<i ivepyeia<i rr]<; avTov. tl<; irepi- TTUTcov tt}? evepyeia<i Tt}^ avTOv iTxiaTpeckerai
;
Tt9 0ovXev6p,evo<! auT^9 t^9 ^ovXfj<;, ou^^t Be tov
324
BOOK II XVI. 9-15
what a crowd is he does not know, nor what the
shouting and the scornful laugliter of a crowd are. Nay, he does not even know what this anxiety itself
is, whether it is something that we can control, or beyond our powers, whether he can stop it or
not. That is why, if he is praised, he goes off the
stage all puffed up ; but if he is lauglied to scorn,
that poor windbag of his conceit is pricked and
flattens out. We too experience something of the same kind.
What do we admire ? Externals. What are we in earnest about? About externals. Are we, then,
at a loss to know how it comes about that we are subject to fear and anxiety ? Why, what else can
possibly happen, when we regard impending events
as things evil ? We cannot help but be in fear, we
cannot help but be in anxiety. And then we say, "O Lord God, how may I escape anxiety? " Fool,
have you not hands ? Did not God make them for you ? Sit down now and pray forsooth that the mucus in your nose may not run I Nay, rather wipe
your nose and do not blame God I What then ? Has he given you nothing that helps in the present
case? Has he not given you endurance, has he
not given you magnanimity, has he not given you
courage ? When you have such serviceable hands
as these do you still look for someone to wipe your
nose ? But these virtues we neither practise nor concern ourselves withal. Why, show me one single
man who cares how he does something, who is con- cerned, not with getting something, but with his own action. Who is there that is concerned with
his own action while he is walking around ? Who,
when he is planning, is concerned with the plan
325
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
16 rv-)(€iv ifceivov irepl ov fiovXeverai ; kolv fiev
TXfXJIt iTTrjpTai Kal Xcyet " ttw? yap T}p^l<t «aX&)?
i^ouXevaafjieOa ; ovk eXeyov troi, aSeX^e, otl
ahvvarov iarLV rjixuiv ri aKe^jrafievcov firj ovTa><i eK^fjuai
;
" av S' erepco^ X^PV'^V' TeraTreirtuTCU
Td\a<i, ovx €upL(TKei ovSe ri eltrr] Trepi tcov yeyovoTcov.
Tt9 rffxoov toutov €V€Ka fidvTiv Trape17
\a^ev ; ri<i r)p,Syv^ eveKOtfMrjdr) virep ivepyeta^
;
Ti? ; eva fioi Sore, iva tSco tovtov, ov €k ttoWov
')(^p6vov ^rjTb), TO*/ TaL<; aXrjdeiai^ evyevrj Kac €V(f)vd' etre viov etre irpea^vrepov, Sore.
18 Tt ovv eVt 0au/jLd^op.€V el irepl fiev ra? y\a9
TCTpLfifieOa, iv he rat? evepyeiai<; raTreipOi, da^Vfiov€<;,
ovBevbii d^ioi, BeiXoL, drakaiiroypoi, oKoi
drv)(r]pxiTa ; ov yap p,efj,e\r)K€V rjpJtv ovSe fieXe19
T(o/xev. el 8e firj tov Odvarov rj rrjv <f)vyr]v
i(f)O^ovfi€0a, dWa rov (f)6^ov, efxeXercb/xev av
€Keivoi<; /J-rj TTepiTriirreiv a <^aiverai rjp^lv KaKu.
20 vvv 8' ei' fiev rfi a'^^oXfj yopyol kuv KarayXwcrcroi,
KCLv ^rjTTj/jLaTiov ep.Trea-r] Trepi Tivo<i tovtcov, iKavoi
rd e^r]<; iireXdeiv eXKvaov 8' eh X/a^o-fi/ Ka\
€vpr}(Tet,<i rdXava<; vavayov<i. TrpocnreaeTw <j)avracria
TapaKTiKt] Kal yvcocrr], ri ep,eXe'To>p.€v Kai
21 7r/jo9 Tt iyvfMva^6p.e6a. Xoiirov vtto ^ t^9 dfie- Xerr)cria^ itpoaeiriacopevofiev dtc riva Kai trpoa1
OVK after ^yuir in S was deleted by Wolf.
» Wolf : lux S.
^ Referring to a dream oracle like that of Asclepius, but
the text is somewhat uncertain. 326
BOOK II. XVI. 15-21
itself, and not with getting what he is planning
about ? And then if he gets it, he is all set up and
says, " Yes, indeed, what a fine plan we made I Did
I not tell you, brother, that, if there was anything
at all in my views, it was impossible for the plan to
fall out otherwise ? " But it the plan goes the other
way, he is humble and wretched, and cannot even
find any explanation of what has happened. Who of us ever called in a seer for a case of this kind .'' Who
of us ever .slept in a temple^ for enlightenment
about our action ? Who ? Show me but one, that
I may see him, tlie man that I have long been
looking for, the truly noble and gifted man ; be
he young or old, only show him ! Why, then, do we wonder any longer that,
although in material things we are thorouglily
experienced, nevertheless in our actions Me are
dejected, unseemly, worthless, cowardly, unwilling
to stand the strain, utter failures one and all .'' For
we have not troubled ourselves about these matters
in time past, nor do we even now practise them.
Yet if we were afraid, not of death or exile, but
of fear itself, then we should practise how not to encounter those things that appear evil to us. But
as it is, we are fiery and fluent in the schoolroom,
and if some trivial question about one of these
f)oints comes up, we are able to pursue the logical
consequences ; yet drag us into practical application,
and you will find us miserable shipwrecked mariners.
Let a disturbing tiiought come to us and you will find out what we have been practising and for what
we have been training! As a result, because of our
lack of practice, we are ever going out of our way
to heap up terrors and to make them out greater
327
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
22 trXdacrofiev fjueii^ova tcov Kadecnwrcov. evdi)^ iyio,
OTav TrXe'ft), KaTaKvy\ra<i eh top ^vdov rj to
TreXayot Tre/Jt/SXei/ra/xero? Kal /xt) IBayv yrjv i^-
Knafxai Kal (f>avTa^ofX€vo<i, on oXov fie Sec to
7reXayo<i tovto eKirielv, av vavayrjaw, ovk iirep-
;^eTat /xoi, ori fioc rpei? ^earai apKovcnv. tL ovv fie rapaa-cret ; to ireXayo'i ; ov, aXXa to
23 Soyfia. ttoXlv otuv cr€iarfio<i yivrjTai, ^avTa^oixaL
OTi rj TroXi<; eTmriiTTeiv jmol p^eXXec ov yap dpKel
p-cKpov \iOdpiov, IV e^co pov top eyKe<^aXov ^dXrj ; 24 Tti/a ovp €(TTi TO, ^apovvTa kuI e^KTTdvTa r/pd^ ; TLia yap aXXa rj to, SoypuTa ; top yap e^iopTa
Kai diraXXaTTopepop tcov avpi^Owp Kal eTaipa>v
Kal TOTToyp Kal crvvavaaTpo(^rj<i tI €(tti to ^apovv
26 dXXo rj Boypa ; to, yovp Traihia €vdv<; OTav KXavar)
piKpa TTJ^ TiTdr]<; d7r€\0ovarj(;, irXaKoiwTiop Xa26
^ovTa eTTiXeXijcTTai. OeXei^; ovp Kal r/peli; Tot?
vaiSloi^ opoiwOfopep ^ ; ov, vrj top Ala. ov yap
VTTO irXaKOVPTLOV tovto rrday^eiv d^io), dXV viro
27 hoypdTWP opOwv. Tipa S' iaTl TavTa ; a Set top
dvdpoiirop oXtjpttjp fjpepap peXeTcovTa prjBepl irpoairda^eip
twp dXXoTpiwv, pn^d eTalpw p,7]Te totto)
prjTeyvppaaioi^, dXXd pi]Be tw acopuTiTw avTov,
p,epvricr6aL Be tov popov Kal tovtop irpo 6(^daXpo)p
28 6%eti'. Tt9 S' p6po<; o Beto<; ; to, tBia Trjpeip, T(ov
dXXoTpLcop prj dpTiTToietaOai, dXXd BiBopepois pev
)(^pr]a6ai, prj BiBopepa Be p,r] irodelp, d(f)atpovpepov
Be Tipos aTToBiBopat, €vXvtci)<; Kal avToOep, x^P''^
* KoraeR : Aixoi/xev S. 328
BOOK II. XVI. 21-28
than they actually are. For example, whenever I go to sea, on gazing down into the deep or looking
around upon the expanse of waters and seeing no
land, I am beside myself, fancying that if I am
wrecked I shall have to swallow this whole ex- panse of waters ; but it does not occur to me that
three pints are enough. What is it, then, that
disturbs me ? The expanse of sea ? No, but my
judgement. Again, when there is an earthquake, 1 fancy that the whole city is going to fall upon me
;
what, is not a little stone enough to knock my
brains out t What, then, are the things that weigh upon us and drive us out of our senses ? Why, what else but our judgements ? For when a man goes hence
abandoning the comrades, the places, and the
social relations to which he is accustomed, what else
is the burden that is weighing him down but a judgement .'' Children, indeed, when they cry a
little because their nurse has left, forget their
troubles as soon as they get a cookie. Would vou,
therefore, have us resemble children ? No, by Zeus ! For I claim that we should be influenced in this way, not by a cookie, but by true judgements. And
what are these ? The things which a man ought
to practise all day long, without being devoted to what is not his own, either comrade, or place, or gymnasia, nay, not even to his own body ; but he
should remember the law and keep that before his
eyes. And what is the law of God ? To guard
what is his own, not to lay claim to what is not his own, but to make use of what is given him, and not
to yearn for what has not been given ; when something
is taken away, to give it up readily and with329
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
elBora ov i-^^^ptjaaro ^povov, el Oe\€i<; fxr} Kkdeiv ^ 29 Trjv TLTdtjV KoX fidfXfirjv. ri yap hia^epei, Tivo<i rjrrwv icnl /cal ck t'lvo^ Kpefiarai ; n Kpemuiv ei Tov 8ia KOpdaiov K\dovTO<;, el Sia yvfivaaiSiov kui
(noiiSia Kal veaviaKupia Koi TOtavrrfv oiaTpi^rjv
30 irevdtU ; a\\o<; ekdayv on oiiKeri to tt)? Atp/t?;?
vScop -TTLveiv fieWei. to yap Wapxiov ^(eLpov eVrt
TOV T/}? AipKrj<i ; "aA,V iicelvo fini crvvi]Oe<i ^v."
31 Kal TOVTO TToXiv ecTTai aoi avvridf.<i. euT av /xev TOiovTcp TTpodirddrjf;, Ka\ tovto ttuXiv xXaie kul
^TjTei aTi^ov ofiocov tw KvpiiTL^ov TTOirjcrai
Oepixd^ t€ Ta<; Nepwi'O? MdpKiov v8(op.
iSe TTW? rpaymZia yiveTai, oTav ct? fi(opov<;
dvOpMTTOVi rrpdyfiUTa to, ^ Tvy^dvovT epb-nearj. 32 "IIoTe ovv 'Adrjva^ irdXiv o-^op-ai /cal Trjv
uKpoiroXiv ; " Ta\a<?, ovk dpKel croi a /3\e7ret9 kuO
Tjfiepav ; KpeiTrov tl ex^i^'i V ^leltov Ihelv tov rfkiov,
T% ae\r)vr)<;, twv daTpwv, Tr]<i yfj<; oXrjs, t/}? 33 6a\da(Tr)<i ; el he 8t] irapaKoXovdel'i tw hioiKovvTi
TO, oXa KUKelvov ev aavTw TrepKpepeif;, ert TrodeU
XiOdpia Kal ireTpav Kofiyjrrjv ; OTav ovv p^eXXrjq
dTToXiTrelv avTOV tov rfXiov Kal ttjv aeXr]vr]v, Tt
34 TTonjaeii; ; KXav<jei<i Kadtjp.evo<; ei)? to. iraLhia ; Tt
^ Shaftesbury : KaKf7v 8.
* Added by Schweigliauser.
^ The fountain of Dirce was at Thebes; tlie Marcian
aqueduct brought good water to Rome at this time.
* A parody upon the Pho'-nissa- , 368: "The gymnasia in which I was reared and the water of Dirce." Polj'neices
is speaking.
33°
BOOK II. XVI. 28-34
out delay, being grateful for the time in which he
had the use of it —all this if you do not wish to be
crying for your nurse and your mammy I For what
difference does it make what object a man has a weakness for and depends upon ? In what respect
are you superior to the man who weeps for a maid,
if you grieve for a trivial gymnasium, a paltry colonnade,
a group of youngsters, and that way of spending
your time ? Someone else comes and grieves
because he is no longer going to drink the water
of Dirce.^ What, is the water of the Marcian aqueduct
inferior to that of Dirce ? " Nay, but I was
accustomed to that water." And you will get
accustomed to this in turn. And then, if you
become addicted to something of this kind, weep
for this too in turn, and try to write a line after the
pattern of that of Euripides : To Nero's baths and Marcian founts once more.'
Behold how tragedy arises, when everyday events
befall fools ! " When, then, shall I see Athens once more and
the Acropolis ? " Poor man, are you not satisfied with what you are seeing every day ? Have you
anything finer or greater to look at than the sun,
the moon, the stars, the whole earth, the sea ? And
if you really understand Him that governs the
universe, and bear Him about within you, do you
yet yearn for bits of stone and a pretty rock ?
'
When, therefore, you are about to leave the sun and
the moon, what will you do ? Will you sit and cry
as little children cry ? What was it you did at
• The rock of the Acropolis and the marble buildings
npon it.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovp iv rfj a-'X^oXf) iTTOL€i<i, ri 7]Kov€<i, ri €/jidv6ave<i ; Tt aavrov (f)i\6ao(f}ov eVeypac^e? e^ov to, ovtu
eTnypdcfyeiv ; on " €l(Taya)yd<; eirpa^d Tiva<i KaX
X.pv(Ti.7nreia dveyvwv, (fii\ocr6(})ou S" ou^e dvpav
35 Trapr]\dov. irov yap p,oi fxeTeari tovtov rov
7rpdypaT0<;, ov ^(OKpdrei fierrjv tw ovtw?
dirodavovTi, ovTOx; ^rjaavTi ; ov Aioyevei fierijv ; "
36 eTTivoet^ Tovrwv riva KXdovra rj dyavaKTOvvra,
OTi TOP Beti^a ov fiiWei /SXiiretv ovSe Tr)v heiva
ovS' iv W$7]vai^ eaeaOai tj iv K.opLvOcp, dXX', av
37 ovTQ)^ '^^XV> ^^ Soucrof? rj iv 'EK^ardvoi^ ; c5 yap
e^eariv i^e\6elv, orav deXrj, rov avfiTToaiov Kai
fiTjKeri Tral^eLV, ert, ovro^ dvidrai fievoiv ; ov-)(l S' eb? iraiSia ^ Trapafievei, /j,expi<: av '^v')(ay(i)yr]rai ; 38 raxv y o.v 6 TotovTO<; v-nofieivat, (fyvyrjv rtva
<f>vyeiv ei? cbTravra rj ttjv eVt davdrat KaTaKpi6ei<;.
39 Ov 6e\ei<i rfhrj a)<; ra iraihia aTroyaXaKTiaOrjvai
Kal diTTeaOai rpo<^rj<; cTTepecoTepa^; fiijSe KXdeuv
40 p.d/u,/j,a^ Kal TLTdd<;, ypaS>v aTroKXavfULTa ; " dW'
iKeiva<i diTaX\a(T(T6pLevo<; dvidao)." av avras
dvidcrei<; ; ovSafici)^, dXX' oTrep Kal ai, to Soy/xa. Tt ovv ex€t<i TToiijaat ; e^eXe, ro S' iKCivcov, av €v TToiwaiv, avral i^eXovcnv el 3e fjL-q, ol/ico^ovai Bi
41 avTd<i. dvdpcoTre, to Xeyofievov tovto diTovoi)di^ri
Tfhri virep evpoia^, virep iXevdepla'i, oirep p,eya-
* Gataker (supported by Bentley and Upton), iratSiS S. Compare the very close parallel in I. 24, 20, and for the frequent use by Epictetus of illustrations from the character and behaviour of children see E. Henner : Das Kind. Ein
Glei'hnis'-viittelhei Kpiktet, Miinchen, 1905, 54 ff.
^ Did no serious work in philosophy. For the figure of speech compare IV. 1, 177.
BOOK II. XVI. 34-41
school ? What was it you heard and learned ? Why
did you record yourself as a philosopher when you
might have recorded the truth in these words : " I studied a few introductions, and did some reading
in Chrysippus, but I did not even get past the door
of a philosopher ? ^ Since what part have I in that
business in which Socrates, who died so nobly, and
so nobly lived, had a part ? Or in that in which
Diogenes had a part .' " Can you imagine one of
these men crying or fretting because he is not going
to see such-and-such a man, or such-and-such a woman, or to live in Athens or in Corinth, but, if it so happen, in Susa or in Ecbatana? What, does he
who is at liberty to leave the banquet when he
will, and to play the game no longer, keep on
annoying himself by staying ? Does he not stay,
like children, only as long as he is entertained ? Such a man would be likely, forsooth, to endure
going into exile for life or the exile of death, if this were his sentence.
Are you not willing, at this late date, like children,
to be weaned and to partake of more solid food, and
not to cry for mammies and nurses—old wives'
lamentations ? " But if I leave, I shall cause those
women sorrow ? " You cause them sorrow ? Not
at all, but it will be the same thing that causes sorrow to you yourself—bad judgement.^ What,
then, can you do ? Get rid of that judgement, and,
if they do well, they will themselves get rid of their
judgement ; otherwise, they will come to grief and
have only themselves to thank for it. Man, do
something desperate, as the expression goes, now if never before, to achieve peace, freedom, and high-
• This point is especially well brought out in Eneheiridion, 5. 333
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Xo>|ri/T^ta9. avdreivov TTore rov rpd'XTjXov to? 42 dirrjWajfiepo'i SouXeta?, ToXfirjaov dva^\e-^a<i
7rp6<i TOP deov elvelv oti " XP^ H'^'' ^olttov els o dv
6ekT}<i' OfioyvfOfMovo) aot, aos ^ elfii' ovSev Trapairovfiai
rtav aol Sokovvtcov ottov deXeis aye' rjv
dekeis icrdqra TrepWes. dp^eiv fie deXeis, ISio)-
reveiv, jxeveiv, (f)evy€iv, ireveadai, irXovrelv ; i<ya>
(TOi VTTep aTravTcov tovtcov Trpbs tovs dvOpcoTTOvs
43 diroXoy^cropat.' hei^co tijv eKacrrov (pvatv oia
44 e<niv*^ ov' d\X' evhov co? Kopdaia ^ Kadi]p,evo<i
eKhe^ov aov ttjp /xdfifxrjv, pexpi^'i o'^ x^pTaar). o 'WpaKXrfs el rots ev oIko) irapeKddrjTO, ris dv rjv ; Kvpv(T6ev<; kuI ovyi 'Hpa/cX^?. dye, iroaovs he
irepiepxop-evos ttjv olKovpevrjv avvi]6ei<i ea^J^v,
(f)L\ov<; ; d}OC ovSev <f}l\T€pov rov Oeov' Bia tovto
eiriffrevOr) Aios vios elvai koI Tqv. eKeivto roivvv
7rei96fievo<i Trepirjei KaOalpcov dSiKiav kuI dvop,iav.
45 dW' ovK el'WpaKkrjS Koi ov hvvacrai KaOaipeiv ra dWorpia xaxd, d\\' ovSe Srjcrevs, "va rd rrjs
'ATTiKrjs KaOdprjS' rd aavrov Kddapov. evrevdev
i/c tt)? Siavotas eK^aXe dvr\ UpoKpovaTov Kal
XKipcovos X.v7rr)v, (po/Sov, i7n6vp,Lav, (f)Oovov,
eiTL'XP'tpeKaKLav, (f>iXapyvp{,ap, fiaXaxiap, uKpa-
' Salmasius : iffos S.
* Capps: iv P'hs KotXla. S (retained by Schenkl), "in a
cow's belly," which might conceivably be a contemptuous
expression for a cradle, or baby basket, but I know of no
evidence to support this view.
^ Compare the critical note. 334
BOOK 11. XVI. 41-45
mindedness. Lift up your neck at last like a mau
escaped from bondage, be bold to look towards God
and say, " Use me henceforward for whatever Thou
wilt ; I am of one mind with Thee ; 1 am Thine ; 1 crave exemption from nothing that seems good
in Thy sight ; where Thou wilt, lead me ; in what
raiment Thou wilt, clothe me. Wouldst Thou have
me to hold office, or remain in private life ; to remain here or go into exile ; to be poor or be rich ?
I will defend all these Thy acts before men ; 1 will show what the true nature of each thing is. " Nay,
you will not ; sit rather in the house as girls do ^ and wait for your mammy until she feeds you I If Heracles had sat about at home, what would he
have amounted to? He would have been Eurystheus ^ and no Heracles. Come, how many acquaintances
and friends did he have with him as he went up and
down through the whole world ? Nay, he had no
dearer friend than God. That is why he was
believed to be a son of God, and was. It was therefore
in obedience to His will that he went about
clearing away wickedness and lawlessness. But vou
are no Heracles, you say, and you cannot clear away
the wickedness of other men, nay, nor are you even a Theseus, to clear away the ills of Attica merely. Very
well, clear away your own then. From just here,
from out your own mind, cast not Procrustes and
Sciron,' but grief, fear, desire, envy, joy at others'
ills ; cast out greed, effeminacy, incontinency. These
* The craven, stay-at-home king, under whose orders Heracles performed his "labours."
• Two famous robbers who infested the road between
Athens and Megara and were given their just deserts by
Theseus. 335
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
46 criav. ravra 8' ovk ecrriv aWoo<; ex^aKelv, el fir) 7r/309 fjLOVOV Tov Ogov airo^Xeirovra, eKeivw fiovM
irpoaTTeirovOora, roi? eKeLVOu nrpoard'yfiaaL Kadco47
criQ)fiivov. av S' aXko Tt 6ekr]<i, olfxoo^cov kui
(TTevcov aKo\ovdr'ia€i<i to) lcr-)(ypoTepw e^co ^tjtojv
ael Tr)V evpoiav teal firiBeTroT evpoeiv Bvvdp,evo<i.
eKel yap ahrrjv ^r^ret?, ov fir) ecmv, a^et? exel
l^rjTeiv, OTTov iarip.
i^. n&)9 i(f)ap/xo(TT60v rd<i 'irpo\i]yfrei<; rot? eirl fiipovi ;
1 Ti irpcoTov iaTiv epyov tov <f)i,\oao(povvTO'i ; diro^aXelv otrjcnv ap,i]^avov yap, a, rt? eiSevai
2 oXerai, Tavra ap^aaBat pavddveiv. ra pev ovv
TTOtTjrea koI ov iroirjTea Kal ayaOa Kai Kaxa xai
Ka\d Kal al(T')^pd Trarre? aV<u kul kuto) \a\ovvT€<i
epxopeda irpo^ tov<; <f>iXoao^ov<i, iirl TovTOi<i iirai- vovvra yfriyovTe<i, iyKa\ovvTe<; pepcpopevoi, irepi
iTrirrjSevpdToyv KaXcbv /cal alcyx^pMV eTTLKpivovre^
3 Kal 8ia\ap^dvovTe<i. rivo'i 6' eveKa npocrepoopeda
T0t9 ^i\oa6(f)0(,<i ; /utadrjaopepoi •'• a ovk olopeOa
elSevai. riva 8' icrrl ravra ; ra Oetap-qpara. a yap \a\ovaiv ol (f>iX6(To<f)Ot padelv OeXopev ol pev ^
0)9 KO/jLyjrd Kal hpipea, ol h , Iv air avTwv Trepnrocr)-
4 awvrai. yeXolov ovv to oXecrdai, on aWa pev
Tt? padelv /SovXerac, dX\a Se padt']crerai, rj Xonrov
5 OTi TrpoKoylrei Tt? iv ol<i ov pavOdvei. to 8' e^a-
* Added by SchenkL
* 01 ix(v added by Schweighauser,
336
^ i.e., of conceit in one's own opinion.
BOOK II. XVI. 45-xvii. 5 things you cannot cast out in any other way than
by looking to God alone, being specially devoted
to Him only, and consecrated to His commands.
But if you wish anything else, with lamentation and
groaning you Mrill follow that which is stronger than
you are, ever seeking outside yourself for peace, and
never able to be at peace. For you seek peace
where it is not, and neglect to seek it where it is.
CHAPTER XVII
How oitght tve adjuil our preconcep/ions to individual
instances ? What is the first business of one who practises
philosophy? To get rid of thinking that one knows 1 ; for it is impossible to get a man to begin
to learn that which he thinks he knows. However,
as we go to the philosophers we all babble
hurly-burly about what ought to be done and what
ought not, good and evil, fair and foul, and on these
grounds assign praise and blame, censure and reprehension,
passing judgement on fair and foul practices,
and discriminating between them. But what do we
go to the philosophers for .' To learn what we do
not think we know. And what is that.' General
principles. For some of us want to learn what the
philosopliers are saying, thinking it will be witty
and shrewd, others, because they wish to profit
thereby. But it is absurd to think that when a man
wishes to learn one thing he will actually learn
something else, or, in short, that a man will make
progrtos in anything without learning it But the
337
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TraTUv TOf? TToWov^ TOUT eariv, oirep Koi
%eoTrofnrov rov ptjropa, o<? irov ^ kul YlXdrcovi
6 eyxaXel iiri ra> ^ovXeaOat, exaara optlleadai. tL •yap Xeyei ; " ovSeh i)/xa)v -npo aov eXeyev ayadov
Tj oLKaiov ; rj fir) TrapaKoXovOovvref ri icnt tovtcov
efcacrrov aai}pw<; koX KevS)<; €(f)6eyy6/jLeOa ^ ra^
7 <i>mvd<i ; " T19 yap aoi Xeyei, SeoTro/xire, on
evvoLaf ovK eT^Oyu.fi' eKaarov tovtcov (f)vaiKa<i kol
'irpoX7]-\lrei(; ; aXX! ovy olov t €(t>app,ol^eiv Ta<;
7rpoX7]ylr€i<; Tah KaTaXXi]Xoi<i ovcriai<; prj SiapOpcl)-
aavTa avTaq Kai avTo tovto a-Keyfrd/mepov, rroLav
8 Tiva cKuaTT] avTOiv ovaiav vTTOTaKTeov. eirel TOiavTa Xeye koI irpo^ tov<; laTpov^- " Ti<i yap
r/fiMP OVK eXeyev vyieivov ti koI vocrepov, 7rp\v
iTTTTOKpaTT] yeieaOut ; rj K€va)^ to,^ (f)(opa<i TavTUf
9 a7r7})^ov/j,€v ;
' e-)(0fj,€V yap Tiva koI vyieivov irpoXrjyfriv.
dXX e(f)app6aatov SvvdpeOa. hia tovto
pev \eyet, " uvdTeivov," 6 Se Xiyei " Sb<; Tpo^rjv^^
Kai p,ev Xeyei " (f>Xe0oT6/j,'rj(Tov," 6 Se Xiyei " atKvaaov. tl to aiTiov ; aXXo ye 17 oti
rrjv Tov vyieivov irpoXrjyjriv ov Bvi'aTui /caXw?
€(f>ap/jLocraL rot? eVt /xepov^ ; 10 Our(o<; €)(ei /cai ivddh^ eVt twv icaTa tov ^iov.
ayat^ov Kai kukov kul crvpcfyepov kuI d(Tvp,(f)opov Tt? r}p(iiv ov XaXet ; rtV yap yjpcov ovk e)(^€i tovWolf
and Koraes : 'ovrv V.
* iSchegk and Salinasius : <{>6<:yy6fxfda S.
^ Almost certainlj' tlie same as Theopompus of Chios, the
pupil of Isocrates, more geneially known to us as an historian,
but also famous in his own time in his declamations {iirt- 338
BOOK 11. XVII. 5-10
multitude are under the same misapprehension as was Theopompus, the orator,^ who actually censures
Plato for wishing to define every term. Well, what
does he say ? " Did none of us before your time
ever use the words 'good' or 'just'? Or, without
understanding what each of these terms severally
mean, did we merely utter them as vague and
empty sounds r " Why, who tells you, Theopompus,
that we did not have a natural conception of each
term, that is, a preconceived idea of it ? But it is imp>ossible to adjust our preconceived ideas to the
appropriate facts without having first systematized
them and having raised precisely this question
—
what particular fact is to be classified under each
preconception. Suppose, for example, that you make
the same sort of remark to the physicians : " VVhy,
who among us did not use terms ' healthy ' and
'diseased' before Hippocrates was born? Or were we merely making an empty noise with these
sounds?" For, of course, we have a certain preconception
of the idea " healthy." But we are unable to apply it. That is why one jjerson says,
"Keep abstaining from food," and another, "Give
nourishment " ; again, one says, " Cut a vein," and
another says, " Use the cupping-glass." What is the reason ? Is it really anything but the fact tliat a person is unable properly to apply the preconceived
idea of " healthy " to the specific instances ? So it stands here also, in the affairs of life. Who
among us has not upon his lips the words "good"
and " evil," " advantageous " and "disadvantageous "
?
For who among us does not have a preconceived
ifiKTiKol \6yoi). The following quotation is probably from
the Diatribe against Plato (Athen. XI, 508c).
339
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ra)v eKcicTTOv TrpoXrjyfnv ; ap* ovv BiripOp(Ofi^V7]v Kul
11 reXeiav ; rovro Bel^ov. " ttco? Bet^o) ; " i(fidp- fxocrov avTrjv AfaXw? rai^ cttI fxepovf} ovaiai^.
€v9v<i Tou<? 6pov<i YiXdrtov fiev vTrordaaei rfj tov
y^prjcripiov jrpoX-qyjrei, <tv Se ttj tov dxpr]crrov.
12 Bvvarov ovv eariv dfj,(f)OTepov<i vfidf; iTnTv<y)(^d- V€CP ; 7rw<? olov re ; ttj he tov ttXovtov ovaia
ov)( 6 fiev Ti<i €<f)apjjL6^€i ttjv tov dyadov TrpoXrjy^iv,
6
5' ov ; ttj he t?}? r}hovi]<i, ttj he t^9
13 vj€ia<; ; KaOoXov yap el 7rdvTe<; ol Ta ovofUiTa
XaXovvra /XT) Kevoi^ icrp^ev eKacTa tovt(ov kui
fir]hep.cd<; eTTifieXeia^ irepl ttjv hidpOpwaiv TOiv
rrpoXi'i-yfrewv heofxeOa, Tt hia(f)ep6fieOa, tl iroXefjLOVfiev,
Tt yp^eyofiev uXXi]Xov<i ; 14 Kai Tt pLOL vvv TTjV TTpo'i uXXtjXov^ l^d^vv
trapa^epetv Kal TavTT]^; pt^pLvrjadai ; <tv auTo? et e(f>apfx6^€i<i KaX(t)<; tu^; itpoXrjy^eif; , hia Tt hvapoel^,
15 hid Tt epLTTohi^ri ; d(f)6!)p.ev dpTV tov hevTepov tottov TOV irepl Ta9 6pfid<; fcal ttjv KaTa TavTUt irepi,
to KadP]Kov (piXoTe-)(^VLav. d<f)cbp,ev Koi tov Tphov
16 TOV Trepl Ta? crvyKaTa^^eaet.^. ')(apil^op,at croi TUVTa irdvTa. aT(o/j,ev eTri tov TrpcoTOv kul crx^- hbv aladyjTTjV 7rape')(^ovTO^ ttjv dTrohei^iv tov /xtj 17 i(f)app.6^€iv «aX&)? Ta? TrpoXyjyf/ei^. vvv av OeXet^i Tu huvaTU Kal Ta <toI hvvaTd ; tI ovv epLirohit^rj ; hid TV hvapoel<i ; vvv ov <pevy€i<i Ta dvayKala
;
^ The word, hvapofiv, ia the opposite of the technical term
fvpofiy (rh evpovv, evpoia), which is a metaphor derived from
the even flow of quiet waters.
* The three fields, according to Epictetus, are, 1. opf^is, desire ; 2. dp/x-q, choice ; 3. ffvyKarddfais, assent. Compare
III. 2. 340
BOOK II. xvii. 10-17
idea of each of these terms ? Very well, is it fitted into a system and complete? Prove that it is. " How shall I prove it ? " Apply it properly to
specific facts. To start with, Plato classifies defini- tions under the preconception " the useful," but you
classify them under that of "the useless." Is it, then, possible for both of you to be right ? How
can that be ? Does not one man apply his preconceived
idea of "the good " to the fact of wealth,
while another does not .' And another to that of
pleasure, and yet another to that of health ? Indeed,
to sum up the whole matter, if all of us who have
these terms upon our lips possess no mere empty
knowledge of each one severally, and do not need
to devote any pains to the systematic arrangement
of our preconceived ideas, why do we disagree, why
fight, why blame one another ? And yet what need is there for me to bring
forward now our strife with one another and make
mention of that f Take your own case ; if you apply
properly your preconceived ideas, why are you
troubled,^ why are you hampered.* Let us pass by
for the moment the second field of study ^—that
which has to do with our choices and the discussion
of what is our duty in regard to them. Let us pass
by also the third—that which has to do with our
assents. I make you a present of all this. Let us
confine our attention to the first field, one which
allows an almost palpable proof that you do not
properly apply your preconceived ideas. Do you
at this moment desire what is possible in general
and what is possible for you in particular ? If so, why are you hampered .' Why are you troubled ? Are you not at this moment trying to escape what
341
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
8ia ri ovv TrepnrcTTTei^ tlvl, Bia ti SucTTi'^ei? ; hia
ri deXovTo^ aov rt ov 'yiveTai koX firj deXovTot
18 'ylverai ; airohei^i'i yap avrr) /xeyLa-Ttj 8va-poia<;
Kal KaKoSatfiovLwi. diXco Tt Kal ov yiveTar kuI
Tt eariv dOXidorepov efiov ; ov OeXay Tt koI
yiV€Tar kuI tl iariv dOXicorepov ifiov ; 19 ToOto Koi, T) M-rfheia ovx viroixeivaaa rjXjdev
eTTi TO aTroKTecvai ra tckvu. fieyaXo^v6i<i Kara
ye TOVTo. el')(e yap fjv Set (pavraciav, olov eari
20 TO a deXei rivi /jlt] 'iTpo-)(a>pe'iv. " eira outo)?
Tifioypijao/xai rov d8iK7](TavTd fie Kal v^piaavra.
KaX Tt 6(f)6Xo<; rov KaKc!)<i ovriof SiaKei/uievov
;
'noi<i ovv yevrjTai ; drroKTeivut fiev rd TCKva,
21 aWa Kal ifjtavrrjv TifKaptjaofMac. Kal Tt fxoi fieXei
;
" tout' eariv eKTrrcocri'; i/^f^^? fieydXa
vevpa ixov(T'r)(;. ov yap fjBei, irov Kelrai to
TToielv a deXofiev, oti tovto ovk e^mdev Set Xafi^dveiv ovSe rd irpdyfiara fieTariOevTa Kal
22 fji€$ap/xo^6/JL€vov. p,rj deXe rov dvSpa, Kal ouSev
biv OiXei^ ov yiverai. fir) OeXe avrop e'f d-navTO'i
aoL (TvvoLKelv, pLT] OeXe fieveiv iv KopivOoi Kal
aTrXfti? pj^hev dXXo deXe rf a o deo<i OeXei. Kat
Tt? ae KcoXvcrei, Tt? dvayKdaei ; ov p,dXXov r) Tov Aia.
23 "Orav toiovtov €')(rj<i r]yep.6va Kal TOiovrqi
avvBeXrj<; Kal crvvopiyr], Tt (f)o^fj ert firj diro- 24 TVXV'^ ,' X«/3«o'at aov Trjv ope^iv Kal rrjv eKKXiaiv
^ What follows is a free paraphrase of Euripides, Medea, 790 flf.
BOOK II. xvn. 17-24
is inevitable? If so, why do you fall into any
trouble, why are you unfortunate ? Why is it that
when you want something it does not happen, and
when you do not want it, it does happen ? For this
is the strongest proof of trouble and misfortune. I want something, and it does not happen ; and what
creature is more wretched than I ? I do not want
something, and it does happen ; and what creature
is more wretched than I r Medea, for example, because she could not endure
this, came to the point of killing her children. In
this respect at least hers was the act of a great
spirit. For she had tlie proper conception of what
it means for anyone's wishes not to come true. " Very well, then," says she,^ "in these circumstances
I shall take vengeance ujjon the man who has
wronged and insulted me. Yet what good do I get
out of his being in such an evil plight ? How can
that be accomplished .' I kill my children. But 1 shall be punishing myself also. Yet what do I care?" This is the outbursting of a soul of great
force. For she did not know where the power lies to do what we wish —that we cannot get this from
outside ourselves, nor by disturbing and deranging
things. Give up wanting to keep your husband,
and nothing of what you want fails to happen. Give
up wanting him to live with you at any cost. Give
up wanting to remain in Corinth, and, in a word, give
up wanting anything but what God wants. And who
will prevent you, who will compel you ? No one,
any more than anyone prevents or compels Zeus.
When you have such a leader as Zeus and identify
your wishes and your desires with His, why are you
still afraid that you will fail ? Give to poverty and
343
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Trevla koI ttKovtw' aTrorev^r], Trepnreafj?- oDOC
vyieia- 8vcrTV)(^^cTei^' ap-)(al'i, Ti/mat^, irarpihi,
<j)i\oi<;, T€Kvoi<;, aTrXw? av rivi tmv aTrpoaipirayv.
26 dWa Tw Ad ')(^dpiaai, avTd<;,^ Tot<; dWoi<; 6eot<i' iK€Lvoi<> TrapdSo'i, eKeivoi KV^epvdrcoaav, yuer' 26 eKeivoiv reTd-^Ofoaav Kal ttov en 8vapoi]a€i<;
;
el 8e (f>6ovei<;, aTaXanroype, xal eXeeZ^ Kal ^rfKorv7r€i<;
Kal Tpefiei<i Kal fiiav rjfiepav ov BtaXeiirei^, ev fi ov KaraK\dei<; Kal aavTov Kal tmv de5)v, 27 Kal Tt ert Xeyea ^ ireiraihevaOaL ; TToiav irai- helav, dvdpwTre ; on (TvXXojiap,ov<i eiTpa^a<i,
IxeraTTiTrTovra'; ; ov 6iXei<; aTTOfiaOelv, el Bvvarov,
irdvTa ravra Kal dvrjdOev dp^acdai avvaiaOavo28
ixevo<i on p-expi vvv ovS" ijyjrto rov Trpdy/xaTO^, Kal
XoiTTOv evdev dp^d/nevo^ ttpoaoiKoSofielv ra e^rj^,
7r(o<i firjSev ecrrat aov firj deXovTO<i, OeXovTa *
fiTjSev ovK eara I ; 29 Aore jjlol eva veov Kara ravrrjv rrjv eTTi^oXrjv
eXrfXvOora el<i a\oXr)v, tovtov tov Trpdyfiaro^
ddXr)Tr)v yevojJLei'ov Kal Xeyovra on " ifioi ra
fiev dXXa irdvTa ')^aipeT(o, dpKel S' el e^earai
TTore dTTapaTTohiarat koX aXvirw Siayayeiv Kal
dvarelvai tov rpd^Tf^ov 7rp6<; to. irpdy/xara o)?
eXevdepov Kal et? tov ovpavov dva/BXeiretv to? (f)LXov rov 6eov firjSev <j)o^ovpevov rSiv crvfM^rjvac 30 8vva/xevcov." Sei^dro) n<; Vfiwv avrov roiovrov,
iva eiTTw ep'xpv, veavicrKe, €t9 ra crd' aot, yap
1 Wolf: irep/*** ^. * Schweighauser : avrd S.
' Wolf : (iriKiffis S. * Supplied by Schweighauser.
344
BOOK II. XVII. 24-30
to wealth your aversion and your desire: you will
fail to get what you wish, and you will fall into what
you would avoid. Give them to health ; you will come to grief; so also if you give them to offices,
honours, country, friends, children, in short to anything
that lies outside the domain of moral purpose.
But give them to Zeus and the other gods ; entrust
them to their keeping, let them exercise the control
;
let your desire and your aversion be ranged on their
side—and how can you be troubled any longer?
But if you show envy, wretched man, and pity, and
jealousy, and timidity, and never let a day pass
without bewailing yourself and the gods, how can you continue to say that you have been educated ? What kind of education, man, do you mean ? Because
you have worked on syllogisms, and arguments with
equivocal premisses ? Will you not unlearn all this,
if that be possible, and begin at the beginning,
realizing that hitherto you have not even touched
the matter ; and for the future, beginning at this point, add to your foundations that which comes
next in order—provision that nothing shall be that
you do not wish, and that nothing shall fail to be
that you do wish .'* Give me but one young man who has come to school with this purpose in view, who has become
an athlete in this activity, saying, " As for me, let everything else go ; I am satisfied if I shall be
free to live untrammelled and untroubled, to hold
up my neck in the face of facts like a free man, and
to look up to heaven as a friend of God, without
fear of what may possibly happen." Let one of you
show me such a person, so that I can say to him
:
Enter, young man, into your own, for it is your
VOL. I. N 345
ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
elfj-aprai Kocrfirjaai (f)iXoao(f}lav, ad can raina
31 rd KTijfiara, trd rd ^i^ia, crot ol Xoyoi. eW\
orav TOVTOv ^ €K7rovi'](TTj Kal Kara6\i]crr) top
roTTov, TTiiXiv iXScov fxot, elirdTQ) " iyd) OeXo) fiev KaL aTTaOrj^ elvai Kal arapa^o?, BeXca S' co?
€V(T€/3r]<; Kal (pLX6ao(f)o^ Kal eVf/LieX^? elhivai tl
jjLoi, 7r/)09 6eov<i iaTi KadrjKov, tl tt/jo? yovel^;, tl
7r/309 u8eX(j)ov<i, tl tt/so? ttjv iraTpiha, tl tt/jo? 32 ^ej/of?." ep)(ov Kal iirl tov hevTepov tottov cro? 33 icni Kal ovto<;. " t'OOC rjhr) Kal tov SevTepov
tottov €Kfxep,eXeTr]Ka. rjdeXov S' dacpaXcbt
ey(€iv ^ Kal dcreicTTU)^ ^ Kal ov /jlovov iyp}]yopM^,
dXXd Kal Kadevhdiv Kal olvci)p,evo<; Kal iv p^eXayXoXla."
av 6e6<; el, o) dvOpoiTre, av p€ydXa<;
e;)^et9 €7ri^oXd<i. 34 Ov' dW' "e7<w OeXo) yvo)vai, tl Xeyei XpufffTTTTO?
ev T0i<; TTepl TOV "^evhopevov." ovk
dirdy^rj peTd tT;? iin^oXrj'i rauTT/?, TaXa'i ; Ka\
TL aoi 6(f)eXo<i earai ; irevOoiv dirav dvayvaxTj)
35 Kal Tp€p.(t)v 7rpo9 dXXov<; epeZ?. ouTtw? Kal vp,el^
TTOieiTe. " OeXei^; dvayvoi aoi, dSeXcpe, Kal ait €p,0L;" " OaupaaTM^;, dvOpwire, ypd<p€i<:'" Kol
" av peydXwi 6t9 tov "HevocpcovTO^ 'x^apaKTrjpa"
36 "(TV et? TOV n\aT&)i'09,*' " av et? tov ^AvTiaOevov^."
eiT dXXr]\oi^ oveipov^ Birjytjadp.evoi
irdXiv eTTt TavTa irravipxeade' MaavTco^i ope-
* Schegk and Upton : roiovroy S.
* Added by 8c. » Wolf: Ao-fTa.j -S".
» Compare I. 18, 23.
- A stock sophism in the form: If a person says, " I am
lying," does he lie or tell the truth ? If he is lying, he
is telling the truth ; if he is telling the truth, he is lying. Cf.
BOOK II. XVII. 30-36
destiny to adorn philosophy, yours are these possessions,
yours these books, yours these discourses.
Then, when he has worked his way through this
first field of study and mastered it like an athlete,
let him come to me again and say, " I want, it is true, to be tranquil and free from turmoil, but I want also, as a god-fearing man, a philosopher and
a diligent student, to know what is my duty towards
the gods, towards parents, towards brothers, towards
my country, towards strangers." Advance now to the second field of study ; this also is yours. " Yes,
but I have already studied this second field. What
I wanted was to be secure and unshaken, and that
not merely in my waking hours, but also when
asleep, and drunk, and melancholy-mad."^ Man,
you are a god, great are the designs you cherish ! No, that is not the way it goes, but someone says, " I wish to know what Chrysippus means in his treatise on The Liar." ^ If that is your design, go
hang, you wretch ! And what good will knowing
that do you ? With sorrow you will read the whole
treatise, and with trembling you will talk about
it to others. This is the way you also, my hearers,
behave. You say : " Shall I read aloud to you,
brother, and you to me ? " ' " Man, you write
wonderfully." And again, " You have a great gift
for writing in the style of Xenophon," " You for
that of Plato," " You for that of Antisthenes." And
then, when you have told dreams to one another,
you go back to the same things again ; you have
VonArnim, Stoicorum Vetenim Fragmentn, II. 92, frag. 280 flF. Chrysippns is said to have written six books on the subject, Dio?. Laer. VII. 196. Cf. Pease on Cic. De Div. II. 11.
* That is, each his own compositions, in expectation of mutual awnpliments. Cf. Hor. Ep. 11. 2, 87 flF. 347
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
f^eaOe, waavTco^ e/cK\iv€T€, 6/u.olo)<; op^iare, iiri- ^dWeade, TrporiOeade,^ ravra ^ ev'^eaOe, irepi 37 ravra cnrovSd^eTe- ecra ovSe ^r]T€iT€ tov vtto- fiVTqaovTa vfia<;, aW* a.'X^OeaOe, iav dKovrjre
Tovrwv. eira Xiyere " affjiXoaTopyo^; yepcov
e^€pxo/J.evov fiov ovk eKkavaev ovK eXirev ' €l<i oXav TTipiaTaaiv aTrepyr) /jlol,^ tckvov av a-coOf)^, 38 a^/reo \v)(yov<;. " ravr eart to. tov <f)i\oar6pyov ; fieya aoi dyadov earai awdevri tocovto) kuI
Xvxviov a^iov. dOdvarov yap elvai ere hel koL
dvoaov.
39 TavTTjv ovv, oirep Xeyco, -r-qv otrjaiv T'qv tov
hoKelv elBevai ri tcov ^prjcrifKov dTro^a\6vTa<i * epy^ecrdac Set 7rp6<; tov \6yov, o)? tt/oo? xa yeco- 40 fierpiKo, Trpoa-dyofiev, &)? 7rp6<; ra fiovcriKd. el Se /JLi], ovB^ €771)9 iaofieda rut irpoKoyfrai, kolv 7rdaa<i rd<{ eiaaytoyk^; ^ Koi Ta9 avvrd^eif Td<;
^pVCrLTTTTOV flCTO, tS)V ^AvTlTTaTpOV KoX 'A/J^eST^/iOU
hiekd(op.ev.
It] , ITw? dyaiviarkov irpo'i xa? (pavraala^ ;
1 Tld<ra €^i<i KoX Bvvafii<; vtto T(ov KaTaWrjXaiV
epytav crvv€)(eTai xal av^erai, 77 irepnraTTjTiKi]
VTTO TOV irepLiraTelv, rj Tpc^^aa-TiKr) vtto tov
2 Tpeyeiv. dv de\r)^ dvayvaxxTiKo^ elvac, dvayiyvwaKC
dv ypa<^LK6^, ypd(f)€. otuv Be TpiaKovTa
^ Wolf : irpiarldeaet S. * Schegk and Wolf: ravra S.
• Koraes : airfpxofiai S. * Koraes : a-iro$d\hovras S.
^ Reiske : ffwayaiyds S.
1 Compare I. 19, 24. 348
BOOK II. xvu. 36-xviii. 2
exactly the same desires as before, the same
aversions, in the same way you make your choices,
your designs, and your purposes, you pray for the same things and are interested in the same things.
In the second place, you do not even look for anybody to give you advice, but you are annoyed
if you are told what I am telling you. Again, you
say : " He is an old man without the milk of human
kindness in him ; he did not weep when I left, nor
say, * I fear you are going into a very difficult situation, my son ; if you come through safely, I will light lamps.' " ^ Is this what a man with the
milk of human kindness in him would say ? It will be a great piece of good luck for a person like you
to come through safely, a thing worth lighting
lamps to celebrate ! Surely you ought to be
free from death and free from disease ! It is this conceit of fancying that we know something
useful, that, as I have said, we ought to
cast aside before we come to philosophy, as we do
in the case of geometry and music. Otherwise we
shall never even come near to making progress, even
if we go through all the Introductions and the
Treatises of Chrysippus, with those of Antipater and
Archedemus thrown in !
CHAPTER XVIII
How must we struggle against our external impressions ? Every habit and faculty is confirmed and
strengthened by the correspKjnding actions, that
of walking by walking, that of running by running.
If you wish to be a good reader, read ; if you wish
to be a good writer, write. If you should give up
349
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
i<j>€^rj^ qfiipa^ firj dvayvo)';, dXX' dWo rt, irpd^rj'i, 3 yvuxTT) TO yivofievov. ovrm^ Kav avairecTrj'^ ScKa
'^fxepa<i, avaara<i eTn-)(eipr](Tov jxaKporepav ohov
TrepnraTTJaai koI o^^ei, irw'i crov ra a-xeXr} Trapa4
\veTai. KadoKov ovv et tc iroieiv eOiXrfi, €ktikov
TToiei avTO' et rt fir) irocelv ide\ij<;, firj iroLei avro,
aXX, edicrov aWo Tt Trpdrreiv fidWov dvT avTOV.
fi ovTOi'i e')(ei Koi eirl reov yjrv^^iKcov' orav opyiadrj^,
ylyvcoaKe on ov /movov aoi tovto yeyovev kukov,
oKhC on KoX Tr]v e^tv rjv^rjaa'; Kat, a)9 irvpl
6 (f)pvyava Tra/jeySaXe?. orav rjrTrjOfj^; nvo<i ev avvovaia, /nrj rrjv fxiav rjTrav ravrrjv Xoyi^ov,
aXX' on KoX rrjv aKpaalav crov rerpo<^a<i, €7n}v7
^r)cra<;. dSvvarov yap aTTo rSiv KaTaWrfKcov
epycov firj KoX Td<; e^ei^ /cal Ta<; hwdf^ei,^ ra^ fiev €fX(jiV€a6ai fir] irpoTepov ovaa^, rd^ 8 iiriTelveadai
Koi l(Tj(ypo'iTOL€.ladai.
8 Ovru)<i dfiiXei Kat, ra dppaxTTijfiaTa virocfyveaOai
Xeyouatv o'l (fiiXocro(f)Oi. orav yap ava^
eTnOvfitja-Tj^ dpyvplov, dv fiev irpoaa-^^dy Xoyo<i
€49 atadrjaiv d^cov ^ rov KaKov, ireTrainai re r) eTTiOvfiia Kal to ^ye/xoviKov rjfiMV ei? to i^apxv'^
9 diroKaTeaTr]' edv he firjEev 7rpoaaydyr}<; et? oepairelav,
ovkctl eh TavTa eTrdveicnv, dXXa iraXiv
ipediaOev vtto Tri<; KaTaXXrjXov t^avTaaiaf daTTOV
rj irporepov e^i](pOr] Trpo? t7]v eTTiOufiiav. Kal
TOVTOV (Tvve^oj'i ycvo/xevov TvXovTai Xonrov Kav
» Wolf : i{jaiy S. 35©
BOOK II. xviii. 2-9
reading for thirty days one after the other, and
be engaged in something else, you will know what
hapj>ens. So also if you lie in bed for ten days, get
up and try to take a rather long walk, and you will see how wobbly your legs are. In general, therefore,
if you want to do something, make a habit
of it ; if you want not to do something, refrain from
doing it, and accustom yourself to something else instead. The same principle holds true in the
affairs of the mind also ; when you are angry, you
may be sure, not merely that this evil has befallen
vou, but also that you have strengthened the habit,
and have, as it were, added fuel to the flame.
When you have yielded to someone in carnal intercourse,
do not count merely this one defeat, but
count also the fact that you have fed your incontinence,
you have given it additional strength. For
it is inevitable that some habits and faculties should,
in consequence of the corresponding actions, spring
up, though they did not exist before, and that others
which were already there should be intensified and
made strong. In this way, without doubt, the infirmities of our mind and character spring up, as the philosophers
say. For when once you conceive a desire for
money, if reason be applied to bring you to a
realization of the evil, both the passion is stilled and
our governing principle is restored to its original
authority ; but if you do not apply a remedy, your
governing principle does not revert to its previous
condition, but, on being aroused again by the corres- ponding external impression, it bursts into the flame
of desire more quickly than it did before. And
if this happens over and over again, the next stage
351
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
10 TO dppaxrTfjfia ^e^aiol Tr)v <f)iKapyvplav. 6 yap
•irvpe^a<;, elra 7ravadfi€vo<; ov^ ofxoiw<^ l^et rw
TTpo Tov TTvpe^ai, dv p,i] rt depairevdrj et? dirav.
11 ToiovTov Ti Kal eVi tcov Tr)<? '^v)(^7]<; iradwv
yLVCTai. ix^V Ttvd Kal pcoXcoTrei; cnroXeiTTovTai
ev avTTJ, ov<; el puy) Ti? e^aXei-yfrrj KaXcof, TrdXiv
Kara twv avroiv fx.a(nt,ycoOel<; ovkcti p,coXci)7ra<i, 12 dXX eXKr] iroui. el ovv OiXei^; firj elvai 6pyiXo<i,
fiT) Tp€(f)€ aov Tr)v e^iv, firjhlv avrfj irapd^aXXe
av^rjTiKov. rrjv irpooTijv 'qavy^aaov koX rd<i 13 r}pbepa<; dpiO/mei. a? ovk oopyi(j6ri<;. " KaO' rjp,€pav
eltodeiv opyl^ecrdai, vvv trap r]p,epav, elra irapd
Bvo, eiTa irapa Tp€i<;." dv he real TpiaKovra irapaXt7r?79,
eiridvaov t& deS). rj yap e^i^ eKXverai
Tt^v TrpooTtjv, elra Kal TravreXSi^ dvatpetTai.
14 "(T^pepov OVK eXvKrjdrjv ovK avpiov ovS' i<^e^ri<i Zip,rjV(p Kal rpip,'>]i>Q)' dXXd 'irpocrea')(^Qv yevopevcov
rivSiv epeBicTiKcov. ytyvwaKe on Kop,-\fro)<; croi eariv.
16 ^rjp,epov KaXov ISmv -q KaXrjv ovk elwov avr6<i
epavTM OTi " a>(f>eX6v rt? perd Tavrrj^; iKoip-rjOrj " Kal " paKapia 6 dvrjp auTi]<i'^^ o yap tovt eiTraiv 16 " paKapio^^^ Kal "6 pot^6<;"' ovSe Ta e^^? dva^coypa<pcb,
irapovaav avrrjv Kal d7roBvop,evr)v Kal
17 TrapaKaraKXivopevTjv. Kara-^w rrjv Kopv^rfv p,ov
Kal Xeyw ev, 'E7rt«T?/Te, Kop-^jrov (TO^iapaTiov
eXvaa<i, ttoXXm Kop,yp'6T€pov tov KvpievovTOf;.
18 dv 8e Kal ^ovXop,€vov rov yvvaiKapLov Kal vevov-
^ See II. 19, especially 1-9.
I
BOOK II. XVIII. 9-18
is that a callousness results and the infirmity
strengthens the avarice. For the man who has
had a fever, and then recovered, is not the same
as he was before the fever, unless he has experienced
a complete cure. Something like this happens also
with the affections of the mind. Certain imprints
and weals are left behind on the mind, and unless a man erases them perfectly, the next time he is scourged upon the old scars, he has weals no longer
but wounds. If, therefore, you wish not to be hottempered,
do not feed your habit, set before it nothing on which it can grow. As the first step,
keep quiet and count the days on which you have
not been angry. " I used to be angry every day,
after that every other day, then every third, and
then every fourth day." If you go as much as
thirty days without a fit of anger, sacrifice to God.
For the habit is first weakened and then utterly
destroyed. "To-day I was not grieved " (and so the
next day, and thereafter for two or three months)
;
" but I was on my guard when certain things
happened that were capable of provoking grief."
Know that things are going splendidly with you.
To-day when I saw a handsome lad or a handsome
woman I did not say to myself, " Would that a man
might sleep with her," and " Her husband is a happy man," for the man who uses the expression
" happy " of the husband means " Happy is the
adulterer" also ; I do not even picture to myself the
next scene—the woman herself in my presence,
disrobing and lying down by my side. I pat myself on the head and say. Well done, Epictetus, you have
solved a clever problem, one much more clever than
the so-called " Master " ^ : But when the wench is 353
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TO<? Koi TTpoairefiTrovTO^, av Se xal dirrofievov kuI
<rvv€yyi^ov7o<; airoay^onfJiai koI viK-qaw, tovto fiev
i]8r] TO a6(f)ta/xa v-wep top '^ev86fievov, virep rov
' Hav^^^d^ovra. iirl TOVTto kol /xeya (^povelv d^iov.
OVK iiTi TU) TOP Kvpievovra ipcorrjcrai.
19 riwv ovv yevTjrai tovto; diXrjaov apeaai avTo^
TTore aeavTcp, OeXrjcrov KaX6<; (pavijvai t« $€a>- iiridvfMTjaov icaOapo^ jxeTa KaOapov aavTov yeie20
a0ai, Kal fieTU tov Oeov. elO^ otuv TTpocnrLTrTr}
aoi Ti<i (pavTua-ia ToiavTr), YIXutcov fiev otl Wi
eVt ra? dTroSt,07rofnn'](T€L<;, Wt eVt dewv diroTpo21
Traiwv lepa iKeTr)^' apxei Kav CTrt tcl^ tcov koXwv
Koi dyadoiv dvBpwv avvovaia^ dTro)((aprj(Ta<i 7rpo<;
TOVTO) yivrj dvTe^eTal^wv, av re Twy ^covtoov tivcl 22 exv^ ^^ "^^ "^^^ diroOavovTwv. direXde 7rp6<;
^(OKpaTTf Kal tSe avTov avy/caTaKeifievov 'AX/ctfiidSr)
Kol hia-rrai^ovTa avrov Trjv oipav. ivdvfxrjdrjTi,
o'iav v'iki)v ttotc eyvw iK€lvo<i vevcKijKOTU
eavTov, ola ^OXvp^iria, ttocto^ di>^ 'HpaxXeovi;
eyeveTO' Xva rt?, vr) Tov<i Oeov^, hiKaiayi
daTTu^rjTai avTov " %ai/oe, irapdSo^e" ovxl tov<;
aairpov^ toutou? irvKTa'i kol TrayKpaTiaaTa<;
ovBe TOi/? 6fioLOV<; avTol^, tov<; iMovofid')(pv^. 23 TavTa dvTi0ei<; vcKi]a-ei<; ttjv ^avTaaiav, ov^
1 For The Liar see on 11. 17, 34. "The Quiescent" was
the somewhat desperate solution of Chrysippus for the
sorites fallacy. On being asked whether two grains made a
heap, then three, and so forth, he would finally stop
answering the questions at all ! Cicero, Acad. Post. II. 93.
2 Laiit, IX. 8.54b (slightly modified).
' Plato, Symposium, 2\%iy ff. * As traditional founder and first victor at the Olympic
games ; all others might be enumerated in order beginning
354
BOOK II. xviii. 18-23
not only willing, but nods to me and sends for me,
yes, and when she even lays hold upon me and
snuggles up to me, if I still hold aloof and conquer,
this has become a solved problem greater than The
Liar, and The Quiescent.^ On this score a man has
a right to be proud indeed, but not about his proposing " The Master " problem.
How, then, may this be done ? Make it your wish
finally to satisfy your own self, make it your wish
to appear beautiful in the sight of God. Set your
desire upon becoming pure in the presence of your
pure self and of God. *•' Then when an external
impression of that sort comes suddenly upon you,"
says Plato,* " go and offer an expiatory sacrifice,
go and make offering as a suppliant to the sanctuaries
of the gods who avert evil "
; it is enough if you
only withdraw " to the society of the good and
excellent men," and set yourself to comparing your
conduct with theirs, whether you take as your model
one of the living, or one of the dead. Go to Socrates
and mark him as he lies down beside Alcibiades ^ and makes light of his youthful beauty. Bethink
yourself how great a victory he once won and knew
it himself, like an Olympic victory, and what his rank was, counting in order from Heracles*; so
that, by the gods, one might justly greet him with
the salutation, " Hail, wondrous man ! " for he was
victor over something more than these rotten boxers
and pancratiasts, and the gladiators who resemble
them. If you confront your external impression
with such thoughts, you will overcome it, and not
with him, although the ordinary count was from Coroebus
of Elia, supposed to have been winner of the footrace in 776 B.C. 355
ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
24 eX.KVcr6i](Trj vtt aur^?. to irpcarov 8" vtto t^9
o^vTTjTOf; fiTj (Tvvap7raadf}<i, aW elne " eKhe^ai
fi€ fiiKpov, (^avraaia' a<p€<; iBw ti? et Kal irepl 25 Tivo^, ac^e? ae SoKifida-o).^ Koi to Xoittov fit) i<pr}<i avTfi Trpodyeiv ava^ci)<ypa<pov(rr) to, €^779.
el Be fii], OLX^Tcii (re e^^ovaa oirov av deXr). dWa
fxdWov aWrjv Tiva dvTeiad'ya'ye kuXtjv koI
yevpaiav <f>avTacrLav koI tuvttjv rrjv pvirapav
26 €K^a\e. Kav ediaOjj^; ouTtu? yvfxvd^eadai, oy^et, oloi Mfioi ytvovTat, ola vevpa, oloi rovof vvv he
fiovov ra Xoydpca Kal ifKeov ovBe ev. 27 OuTo? eariv 6 Tat? d\r)deiai<i daKrjTrjf; 6
TTyoo? Ta? TOiavTa<; (f>avTa(Tia<i yvfivd^oov eavrSv.
28 fielvov, Td\a<i, firj avvapTraadfj';. fieya^ 6 dycov
iaTtv, Oelov to epyov, inrep ^acriXeia^, virep
29 iXevdepla^, vrrep €vpoia<i, virep drapa^ia^. rov
deov /j,€/xvT)a-o, eKelvov iiriKaXov /3oi]d6v koI
irapacndrr^v eo? Toy? AiocTKopov^ ev 'x^ei/jLMVi ol irXeovra. 7roio<i yap jxei^cov ')(eip,u}v rj 6 eK
(f>avTaai&v la-xypoov xai eKKpovariKSiv rov Xoyov;
auTO? yap 6 'X^eip,cov ri dXXo ecrrlv rj ^avraaia ; 30 eiTel Toi dpov rov (f)6^ov tov Oavdrov xal <f>ep€
6aa<i OeXet^ /SpovTO,^ Kal dcrrpa'rrd'i Kal ypcoa-p,
6(77} yaXrjvr) iarlv ev tw TjyefioviKQ} Kal evSut.
31 av 8' dira^ riTTr]6el<i etTr?;? OTt vcnepov viK7]crei<i,
elra irdXiv to avTO, ladi on ovtco<; ttoO' efet?
KaKM<; Kal dadtv5}<i, ware p,T]8' iiptardveiv varepov
* That is, reason.
I
BOOK II. xviii. 23-31
be carried away by it. But, to begin with, be not
swept off your feet, I beseech you, by the vividness
of the impression, but say, " Wait for me a Httle, O
impression ; allow me to see who you are, and what
you are an impression of; allow me to put you
to the test." And after that, do not suffer it to
lead you on by picturing to you what will follow.
Otherwise, it will take possession of you and go off with you wherever it will. But do you rather
introduce and set over against it some fair and noble
impression, and throw out this filthy one. And if you form the habit of taking such exercises, you
will see what mighty shoulders you develop, what
sinews, what vigour ; but as it is, you have merely
your philosophic quibbles, and nothing more. The man who exercises himself against such
external impressions is the true athlete in training.
Hold, unhappy man ; be not swept along with
your impressions I Great is the struggle, divine
the task ; the prize is a kingdom, freedom, serenity,
peace. Remember God ; call upon Him to help you
and stand by your side, just as voyagers, in a storm,
call upon the Dioscuri. For what storm is greater
than that stirred up by powerful impressions which
unseat the reason ? As for the storm itself, what else
is it but an external impression ? To prove this,
just take away the fear of death, and then bring on as much thunder and lightning as you please,
and you will realize how great is the calm, how fair the weather, in your governing principle.^ But if you be once defeated and say that by and by you
will overcome, and then a second time do the same
thing, know that at last you will be in so wretched
a state and so weak that by and by you will not so 357
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
on d^aprdvei^, dWa kuI d'jro\o'yia<i dp^rj iropi- 32 ^€iv vir- p Tov irpdy/jLarrx;' xal Tore ^e^ai,Q>(T€i<;
TO rov 'Waiohov, on dXrjOe'i iariv
alel S' dfj,^oXiep<yb<; dvrjp UTyai TraXalei.
id' . IT/DO? Toy? /*€%/>* X0701/ fjLovov dvoKafi-
^dvovTa^ rd twv <f)i\ocr6(f>(i)v.
1 'O Kvpteucov \6yo<; aTro roiovrcov tcvwv d<^opp.S)v
^peoTr/aOai <f>aiv€Tat' koivi]<; yap ovcrrj^; fid^Vi
Tol'i rpLal TovTOC^ TTyoo? dWr}\a, tw rrdv rrape-
\t]\v66<; d\y]06<i dvayKoiov elvai xal tw Svi'aTot
uSvvarov firj uKoXovOelv Koi rw hwarov ^ elvai
OUT eanv dXr]6e<i out' earai, avvthoov rrjv
/j,d')(^T]v Tavrrjv 6 AioScopo^ ttj rwv irpcoToiv ^velv
TTiOavorrjTL avve)(^pij(TaT0 TTyoo? irapdaraaiv tov
fMTjBev elvai Bwutov, o out' ecrnv aXijOef; ovt
2 eaTUi. XaiTTOv 6 p^ev n<i Tavra Trjprjcrei tcov
Svelv, OTi €<TTi T6 Ti SviaTov, OVT €aTiv d\i]de<;
OVT ecTTat, KOi hvvaTu> dSvi arov ovk aKoXovOei'
ov irdv 8e 7rapeXriXvd6<; dXi]0e<i dvayicaiov icrTiv,
* Before this word there is an erasure of two letters inS.
^ Works and Days, 413,
* So called because thought to be unanswerable ; it in- volved the questions of " the possible " and '
' the necessary,"
in other words, chance and fate, freewill and determination. The matter was first set forth in a note contributed to Upton's edition of Epictetus by James Harris, and re- published, with additions, by Schweighauser. Definitive
is the discussion by Eduard Zeller, Sitzungsber. der Berliner
BOOK II. XVIII. 31-XIX. 2 much as notice that you are doing wrong, but you
will even begin to offer arguments in justification
of your conduct ; and then you will confirm the
truth of the saying of Hesiod : Forever with misfortunes dire must he who loiters cope.^
CHAPTER XIX
To those who take up the teach'mgs of the philosophers
only to talk about them
The " Master argument " ^ appears to have been
propounded on the strength of some such principles
as the following. Since there is a general contradiction
with one another^ between these three
propositions, to wit : (1) Everything true as an event
in the past is necessary, and (2) An impossible does
not follow a possible, and (3) What is not true now
and never will be, is nevertheless possible, Diodorus,
realizing this contradiction, used the plausibility
of the first two propositions to establish tlie principle,
Nothing is possible which is neither true now nor ever will be. But one man will maintain,
among the possible combinations of two at a time,
the following, namely, (3) Something is possible,
which is not true now and never will be, and (2) An
impossible does not follow a possible ; yet he will not grant the third proposition (1), Everything true
as an event in the past is necessary, which is what
Akad. 1882, 151-9. See also his Phi'ostyphie der Grvchn)},
II. 1, 269-70 For the context in which these problems
appear, see also Von Amim, Stoicorum FeUruin Frafftaenta,
I. 109; II. 92 f. • That is, any two are supposed to contradict the third.359
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
KaOdirep oi irepl KXedvOtjv ^epeadai SoKouaiv,
3 0I9 eVt TToXii crvvrjy6pt]crev ^Avriirarpo'i. 01 8e raXXa hvo, oti Svvarov t' iariv, ovr eariv
d\r]0e<i OUT ecnai, koI ttuv TrapeXriXvOof dXtjOe^
dvajKalov iarLv, Svparq) S" dSvvaTov aKoXovOei.
4 TO, rpla 8' eKelva rr^prjaat dfirj')(avov Bid to
KoiVTjv elvai avTiov /xd^ijv.
5 *Av OVV Tt? IXOV TTvdrjTat " (TV hk TTola aVTOiV
Trjpel^ ; " diroKpLvovfiai irpo^ ainov oti ovk 6l8a'
irapeiXtjc^a K icrropiav roiavTrjv, oti AtoScopo?
fj,€V CKelva iTTjpei, ol Be irepl UavOoiBrju olfiat Kal K.Xedv6r]v rd dXXa, oi Be irepl ^pvanrirov
6 Ta dXXa. " av ovv tL ; " ovBe yeyova tt/so? ToyTft), TO) ^aaaviaai ttjv ifiavrov ^avraaiav
Kal avyKplvai rd Xeyofjieva koI Boyfia ti ifiavTOv
7roir]aaaOai Kara tov tottov. Bid tovto oiiBev
7 Bia<pepo) TOV ypap.p.aTiKOV. " Tt9 ^v a tov
"EjKTopo<; iraTTjp
;
" " Ilpta/xo?." " Ttve? dBeX<poL
;
" ^ A.Xe^avBpo<i jcal ArjL(f)o^o<i.^^ " p-rjTrip S' avTOiv
Ti<i ; " " 'EKa^Tj. 7rapeLXr](fia TavTrjv Trjv Ictto- plavT " trapd Tivo<; ; " " Trap' 'Ofirjpov. ypd<^ei
Be irepl i5)v avTOiv Bokco kuI ' E\XdviKO<i koI et 8 Tt9 dXXo^ TOtovTO<i" Kayco irepl tov KvpievovTO<i
Ti dXXo exw dvcoTepot) ; dXX^ dv co Kevo^, fidXiaTa
iirl avfiTToaia) KaTairXrjcrao/xai tou? iTapovTa<i,
9 i^apt6fiovfj,€vo<i Tov^ yeypatpoTa^:. " yiypacpev
Be Kal \pv<rnnro<i 6avfjiaaTco<; iv T(p irpooTO) irepi
^ That is, deny (2) that " An impossible does not follow a
possil)le."
' That is, each pair is in conflict with the third. 360
BOOK II. XIX. 2-9
Cleanthes and his group, whom Antipater has
stoutly supported, seem to think. But others will maintain the other two propositions, (3) A thing
is possible which is not true now and never will be, and (1) Everything true as an event in the |)ast
is necessary, and then will assert that, An impossible
does follow a possible.^ But there is no way by
which one can maintain all three of these propositions,
because of their mutual contradiction.'
If, then, someone asks me, " But which pair of
these do you yourself maintain?" I shall answer him that I do not know ; but I have received the
following account : Diodorus used to maintain one
pair, Panthoides and his group, I believe, and
Cleanthes another, and Chrysippus and his group
the third. "What, then, is your opinion?" I do
not know, and I was not made for this purjx>se—to
test my own external impression upon the subject,
to compare the statements of others, and to form
a judgement of my own. For this reason I am no better than the grammarian. When asked,
"Who was the father of Hector?" he replied, " Priam." " Who were his brothers ? " " Alexander
and DeTphobus." "And who was their mother?"
" Hecuba. This is the account that I have received."
"From whom?" "From Homer," he said. "And
Hellanicus also, I believe, writes about these same
matters, and possibly others like him." And so it
is with me about the " Master Argument " ; what
further have I to say about it? But if I am a vain
person, I can astonish the company, especially at a banquet, by enumerating those who have written on the subject. "Chrysippus also has written admirably
on this topic in the first book of his treatise
361
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
AvvaToi)V. xal K\€dv6r]<; 8' IBia 'yeypa<f>€V Trepi
rovTOv Kul 'Ap)(^€St]/jlo<;. y€ypa(f)ev 8e Kai ^Avtl7raT/309,
ov ^l6vov h ev Toi<t irepl Avvar&v, dWa
10 Kal KaT Ihlav iv Tol<; Trepl tov KvpievovTo<i. ovk
dveyv(OKa<; rrjv crvvra^iv
;
" " ovk dveyvwKa. ' " dvdyvwdi. ' Koi rl w(})€\r)6r](reTai ; (f)\vap6-
Tepo9 ecTTat koI uKaiporepo^ rj vvv icrriv. croi yap Tt aWo irpoayeyovev dvayvovrt ; volov
Soyfia ireTroirjaaL Kara tov tottov ; aXX.' ipel<i
rjfxlv 'KXevrjv koI Ylpiafiov Kal ttjp ri}? KaXi/'v|/"o{}9
vrjcrov rrjv ovre yevo/xivijv oi/t' ecrofievrjv.
11 Kal ivTavda p.ev ouBev fiiya Trj<; i(TTopta<i
KpoTeiv, lBcov Be 86y/j,a firjSev TTeiroLrjaOai. i-rn Twv rjOiKcov Se '7rda')^ofiev auTO ttoXv fidWov r/ 12 eTTi TovTtov. " elire fxoi irepl dyadcov Kal KaxSyv. " aKove'
iXcodev fi€ (pepcov dvefio<; KiKovea-ai ireXaacrev.
13 ro)v ovrwv ra fiev eariv dyaOd, rd he KaKa, rd
8' d8id(f)opa. ayadd fiev ovv al dperal Kal rd
piere^^ovra avrwv, KaKd he KaKiai koI xa jxerey^ovra
KaKiaii, dhid(f)opa he rd fxera^v rovrcov,
7rXovro<;, vyieia, ^o)/], ddvaTO<i, rjhovrj, ttovo?."
14 " TToOev olBa'i ;^^ "
' Fj\XdviKO<; Xiyet ev rot? AlyvTrTiaKoU." tl .dp htacpepec tovto elirelv rj OTi A^coyevT]<i ev ri] ^V\dLKff 97 X.pvannro'; rj KXedvdri<; ; ^e^aadvcKa^ ovv tl avTO)v Kal hoyfia
* That is, instead of speaking from your own knowledge
or belief, you will merely recite the opinions of others.
2 Homer, Od., IX. 39. The inappropriate quotation (as with Hellanicus below) shows the absurdity of such a treatment of ethical questions.
362
BOOK II. XIX. 9-14
On Things Possible. And Cleanthes has written a
special work on the subject, and Archedemus.
Antif>ater also has written, not only in his book
On Things Possible, but also a separate monograph
in his discussion of The Master Argument. Have
you not read the treatise?" "I have not read it." "Then read it." And what good will it do him?
He will be more trifling and tiresome than he is already. You, for example, what have you gained
by the reading of it? What judgement have you
formed on the subject? Nay, you will tell us of
Helen, and Priam, and the island of Calypso^ which
never was and never will be ! And in the field of literary history, indeed, it is of no great consequence that you master the received
account without having formed any judgement of
your own. But in questions of conduct we suffer from this fault much more than we do in literary matters. "Tell me about things good and evil." " Listen
:
The wind that blew me from the Trojan shore
Brought me to the Ciconians.'
Of things some are good, others bad, and yet others
indifferent. Now the virtues and everything that
shares in them are good, while vices and everything
that shares in vice are evil, and what falls in between
these, namely, wealth, health, life, death, pleasures,
pain, are indifferent." " Where do you get that
knowledge?" " Hellanicus says so in his History
of Egypt." For what difference does it make
whether you say this, or that Diogenes says so in his Treatise on Ethics, or Chrysippus, or Cleanthes ? Have you, then, tested any of these statements and
363
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
15 aeavTov ireTroirjaat ; SeiKvve tto)? eiwOa^ iv irXoio)
')(eiixd^ea9ai.^ fie/uivrjaai ravTTjf t?}? 8taipiar€a)<i, orav \fro(f>i](Tr] to 1(ttiov koL avaKpavyaaavri aoi
KaK6cr-)(o\6^ 7r&)9* 7rapa(TTa<i eiirij "Xiye fioi rov<i 6eov<i <xot ola^ 7rpa>r]v e\€y€<;' firj tl kukiu^
16 etTTi TO vavayrjcrai, pLrj tl KaKia^ p,ere')(pv ;
' ovk
cipa<i ^vXov iv(TeiaeL<i avT& ; " tl rjpZv KaX <tol, avOpwire ; diroWvfxeda xal arv iXdcov 7rai,^€i<i. 17 &v Si ae 6^ Kal(rap p,€TaTT€fx,yfrr)Tat. Karrjyopovp,evov,
fiefiVTjaai Try? SiaLpeaeco^' av Tt? aoi,
elaiovri koX to^pi&ifTt dpu Koi Tpep-ovTi irpoaeXOfov
eXirrj " ri rpifiei*;, avdptoTre ; irepX rivcov
aoL icrriv 6 X0709 ; fit] tl ecrco 6 Kaicrap dpcTrjv
18 /cat kukIuv Toi<; elaep^Ofiivoif; BiSaxri ; " " tl fioc
i/j,7raL^€i<; koI av Trpo? Tot? ifiol^ KaKoi<i
;
" 6p,a)<i, (f)t\6aocf)e, elire fioi, tl Tpefieif ; oi/%l ddvuTO^ eaTi to KivBuveuofievov rj Sea/xcoTrjpiov
rj TTovo^ Tov (TcofiaTO^ rj (pvyrj rj dho^ia ; tl yap
dXXo ; /X7J Tl KUKLa, firj tl fi€TO)(ov KaKLa<i ; ai)
19 ovv TLva TuvTa eXe^e?
; " " tl ifxol /cai aoi,
avOpwrre ; dpKsl ifiol tu efia Kaxd. kul Ka\co<;
Xeyei'i. dpxel yap aoi to, ad Kaxd, 77 dyevueia,
7} BeiXia, rj d\a^ov€La, rjv rjXa^ovevov iv ttj axoXfj
Kadt]p,evo<;. tl toI^ dWoTpLOL<i eKaWcoTTL^ov ; tl "^iTwiKov ekeye<i aeavTov
;
* Restored by Bentley from Gellius, Nodes Atticae, I. 2, 8:
yvixvaCfffBai S. * Preserved by Gellius : cm. S.
* Bentley : o-oi, & Gellius, oTa S.
* Bentley : KaKeia Gellius, /tafias S.
' Preserved by Gellius : om. S. 364
BOOK II. XIX. 14-19
have you formed your own judgement upon them ? Show me how you are in the habit ol conducting
yourself in a storm on board ship. Do you bear
in mind this logical distinction between good and
evil when the sail crackles, and you have screamed
and some fellow-passenger, untimely humorous, comes up and says, " Tell me, I beseech you by
the gods, just what you were saying a little while
ago. Is it a vice to suffer shipwreck ? Is there
any vice in that ? " Will you not pick up a piece of
wood and cudgel him ? " What have we to do with
you, fellow ? We are perishing and you come and
crack jokes!" And if Caesar sends for you to answer an accusation, do you bear in mind this distinction ? Suppose someone approaches you when
you are going in pale and trembling, and savs, " Why are you trembling, fellow ? What is the
afl^air that concerns you ? Does Caesar inside the
palace bestow virtue and vice upon those who
appear before him ? " " Why do you also make
mock of me and add to my other ills ? " " But yet,
philosopher, tell me, why are you trembling? Is not the danger death, or prison, or bodily pain, or
exile, or disrepute? Why, what else can it be?
Is it a vice at all, or anj-thing that shares in
vice? W'hat was it, then, that you used to call these things?" "What have I to do with you,
fellow? My own evils are enough for me" And
in that you are riglit. For your own evils art enough for you —your baseness, your cowardice, the
bragging that you indulged in when you were sit- ting in the lecture room Why did you pride yourself
upon things that were not your own? Why
did you call yourself a Stoic?
365
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
20 TrjpeiTe ovT(o<i iavToif^; iv oh eirpacraeTe Kal
evp7]a€T€ t'lvo^ €aO' aipiaeco^. Toifi ifKelarov^
VfiMV ^EjTriKovp€t,ov<; €vpi](T€Te, oXijovf; Tiva<; 21 Tl€pnraT}]TiKov<; koI rovrov^ iK\e\vpAvov^. ttov yap iv vfX€t<; rrjv aperrjv irdaiv rot? dWoc; larjv
Tj Kal KpeiTTOva epyw v7ro\d^r}T6 ; Xtwikov Be
22 hei^UTe fioi, et riva e^T^re. ttov r) ttw? ; aWa
TO, Xoydpia ra ^tcocko, Xiyovra<i fjbvpcov<;. ra yap ^EiriKovpeia avrol ovtoi "Xelpov Xiyovai
;
TO, yap TlepiTraTr)riKd ov kuI avra 6p,oio)^ dxpL23
^ovaiv ; Ti9 ovv icrri Xtq}ik6<; ; &>? Xeyofiev
dvhpidvra ^eiSiuKov tov rervTrcofiivov Kara rrjv
rexviqv rr)v ^eihiov, ovtq)^ rivd p,oi Sei^are Kara
24 TO, BoyfiaTU a XaXei TervTroypbivov. hel^are pLol
Ttva voaovvra koX evTV^ovfra, KivBuvevovra
Kal evTV)(ovvTa, diroOvrjaKovra kuI €VTV)(Ovvra,
TrecfyvyaSevfievov Kal evTV)(ovvra, dho^ovvra Kal
evTVXovvTa. Sei^aT' eindvpLoi Tiva vrj rov<i 25 6eov<; IBeiv ^tcoikov. dXX' ovk e^^ere tov rervTTwpLevov
Sel^ai' tov ye TVirovp^evov het^aTe, tov
eirl TavTa KeKXiKOTa. evepyeTijaaTe p-e' firj (pdovrjarjTe dvOpdoTTO) yepovTi Ihelv Oeap,a, o P'^xpi
26 vvv OVK elSov. oleade oti tov Aia tov ^eiSiov
Set^ere ^ Tr)v ^ASijvdv, iXecfydvTtvov Kal ')(^pvaovv
KaTaaKevacrp.a ; "^vxv^ Sei^dTO) rt? vp,(av
dvdpcoTTov deXovTOs 6p.oyvcop,ovf]aai tw deat Kal
firjKert p,i]T€ deov pur)T avdpo)7rov p,ep,(j)ea6ai, /nrj diroTVXelv Tivo<i, firj irepLireaelv tivi, p,r) opyi-
* An early Christian scholiast remarks at this point
"And I would fain see a monk."
366
BOOK II. XIX. -20-26
Observe yourselves thus in your actions and you
will find out to what sect of the philosophers you
belong. You will find that most of you are Epicureans,
some few Peripatetics, but these without
any backbone ; for wherein do you in fact show
that you consider virtue equal to all things else, or even superior ? But as for a Stoic, show me one if you
can I VVhere, or how ? Nay, but you can show me
thousands who recite the petty arguments of the
Stoics. Yes, but do these same men recite the
petty arguments of the Epicureans any less well?
Do they not handle with the same precision the
petty arguments of the Peripatetics also? Who,
then, is a Stoic? As we call a statue " Pheidian " that has been fashioned according to the art of
Pheidias, in that sense show me a man fashioned
according to the judgements which he utters. Show me a man who though sick is happy, though
in danger is happy, though dying is happy, though
condemned to exile is happy, though in disrepute is happy. Show him ! By the gods, 1 would fain see a
Stoic ! ^ But you cannot show me a man completely
so fashioned ; then show me at least one who is becoming
so fashioned, one who has begun to tend
in that direction ; do me this favour ; do not
begrudge an old man the sight of that spectacle
which to this very day I have never seen. Do
you fancy that you are going to show me the Zeus
or the Athena of Pheidias, a creation of ivory
and gold ? Let one of you show me the soul of a man who wishes to be of one mind with God, and
never again to blame either God or man, to fail in nothing that he would achieve, to fall into nothing
that he would avoid, to be free from anger, envy
367
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
a-drjvai, /j,rj (f)6ovrja-ai, fir) ^ifKoTVirrja-ai {rl yap
27 Set irepiTrXeKeiv ;), deov i^ avdpwTTOv iindvp^ovvra
yeveaOai koI ev ra> (TU)p,aTi(p tovtw tw veKpw
irepl tt;? Trpo? rou Am Koivcovla<i ^ovXevofievov.
28 hei^are. aWa ovk e^ere. rl ovv avrol^ ip.Tralfere
koX tov^ dWov<; Kv^evere ; Koi Trepidefievoi
a-)(rip,a aWoTpiov TrepnrarelTe KkiiTTai Kal
XfOTToSvrat tovtcov tmv ovSev 7rpo(rr]K6vrcov
ovofxajwv Kal Trpaypdrcov ; 29 Kal vvv iyco /xev Trai8euTi]<; elfit vp.erepo';, vfJLCi^ 8e irap^ ejxol iraiheveade. Kayco p,€v e';^a) ravTTjv
TT)V €7n^o\7]v, arroTekecrat vpd<; olkcoXiitov^,
avavayKiicTTOv^, aTrapaTTohlaTov;, iXevdepovf;,
€vpoovvTa<;, evSaifiovovvra^i, et? top deov d(f)0-
pS)VTa<i iv Travrl Kat p,iKp5> Kal fieyakto' vfj,€i<; Be ravra pa6r]cr6p,evoi Kal p,€\eT7]<rovT€<; irdpeare.
30 hia Tt ovv OVK dvvere ro epyov, el Kal u/x€t9
e-xjer eTTilSoXrjv o'Cav Set Kayco trpo'i rfj ein^oXfj
Kal TrapacTKevrjv o'iav Set ; tL to Xelirov eariv ; 31 OTOV i8o) TeKTOva, oto) ^ vXrj irdpeariv irapaKeijxevri,
eK8e)(^o/jiai to epyov. Kal evOdSe roivvv
6 reKToyv ecnlv, i) vXrj ea-riv rl rjixlv Xelirei
;
32 OVK ecrrc SiSaKrov ro irpdy/xa ; SiBaKrov. ovk
€(TTiv ovv i<f) rjfilv ; povov pev ovv rcov dWcov
irdvToyv. oijre ttX-outo? eariv i(f)' r)p,iv ovB"
vyleia ovre Bo^a ovre dWo ri difkS)^ ttXtjv opdrj
'^pr)cri<i (f)avra(Ti(ov, rovro aKcoXvrov (pvcrei p,o- 33 vov, rovro dv€/J-7r6Bi<Trov. Bia rl ovv ovk dvvere ; elirare p,oi rrjv alrlav. ^ yap Trap" ep-e ylverai rj
* Schenkl : 8t* fty 5 {trav corr.),
36«
BOOK II. XIX. 26-33
and jealousy—but why use circumlocutions ?
—
a man
who has set his heart upon changing from a man
into a god, and although he is still in this paltry
body of death, does none the less have his purpose
set upon fellowship with Zeus. Show him to me
!
But you cannot. Why, then, do you mock your
own selves and cheat everybody else ? And why
do you put on a guise that is not your own and walk
about as veritable thieves and robbers who have
stolen these designations and properties that in no
sense belong to you ? And so now 1 am your teacher, and you are being
taught in my school. And my purpose is this—to make of you a perfect work, secure against restraint,
compulsion, and hindrance, free, prosperous, happy,
looking to God in everything both small and great
;
and you are here with the purpose of learning and
practising all this. Why, then, do you not complete
the work, if it is true that you on your part have
the right kind of purpose and I on my part, in
addition to the purpose, have the right kind of
preparation 'f What is it that is lacking ? When
I see a craftsman who has material lying ready at hand, I look for the finished product. Here also,
then, is the craftsman, and here is the material
;
what do we yet lack ? Cannot the matter be
taught ? It can. Is it, then, not under our control .' Nay, it is the only thing in the whole world that is under our control. Wealth is not under our control, nor health, nor fame, nor, in a word, anything else
except the right use of external impressions. This
alone is by nature secure against restraint and
hindrance. Why, then, do you not finish the work ? Tell me the reason. For it lies either in me, or in 369
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Trap vfid<; fj Trapa rrjv (ftvcriv tov irpdyfiaro^;.
avTo TO 7rpdy/Jia evhe)(^oiievov koI fxovov 6</)' r^pJiv. XoiTTOv ovv rj Trap e/xe eariv fj irap upd^ ij, oirep
34 dX7]de(TTepov, irap^ dp(f)OTepov^. tl ovv ; t^eXere dp^copeOd TTore rotavTTjv eTTL^oXrjv Kop,i^€iv iv- TavOa ; ra p-e^pi vvv dcf>o)pev. dp^copbeda fiovov,
TTiaTevaare pLot, kuI oyfrecrOe.
K . H/OO? 'E7rt«OU/96tOU9 KoX ' AKaBr)puiiKOV<i.
1 Toi? vyieai kuI evapyiaiv i^ dvdyKTj'i koX oi avTiXeyovT€<; irpocr^poiVTai' koI aj(^ehov tovto
pueyiCTTOV dv Tt9 iroirjcraiTO T€Kp,rjpiov rov ii apye<i
Tl elvai, TO iirdvayKe<i evpiaKecdai Koi T&
2 dvTiXeyovTi (ruy^prjcraadai avTut- olov ei ti?
dvTiXeyoi tw elvai ti tcadoXt/cov dXrjOe^i, SijXov
OTi Ty-jv ivavTLav diro^aaiv ovto<; ocfyeiXei iroi- rjaaaOai' ovSev icrTi KadoXiKOV dXrjde^. dvBpd3
TToSov, ouBe TOVTO. Tl yap dXXo eVrt tovto f] olov
4 €c Tl ecTTi KaOoXiKov, ^evho'i icrTiv ; irdXtv dv Ti<i TrapeXOwv Xeyrj " yiyvwaKe, oti ovSev etJTi yvuiCTOv, a^CXd irdvTa aTSKpapTa, ' rj dXXo^
OTi " TTicTTevaov p,oi Kai d)(f>eXr]Oyjar]' ovSev Bel
dvOpatircp iriaTeveiv^ fj irdXiv dXXo<i " pdOe -nap
5 ipLov, dvOpcoTre, oti ovSev ivSixeTai pLaOeiv iyco
» In § 29.
* The essential position of the philosophers of the New or Middle Academy as exemplified by Arcesilaus and Carneades,
which Epictetus attacks here, was the denial of the possibility
of knowledge, or of the existence of an}- positive
proof, and the maintenance of an attitude of suspended
judgement.
BOOK II. XIX. 3',-xx. 5 you, or in the nature of the thing. The thing itselt
is possible and is the only thing that is under our
control. Consequently, then, the fault lies either
in me, or in you, or, what is nearer the truth, in us
both. What then .'' Would you like to have us at
last begin to introduce here a purpose such as I have described ?
^ Let us let bygones be bygones.
Only let us begin, and, take my word for it, you
shall see.
CHAPTER XX
Against Epicureajis and Academics ' The propositions which are true and evident must
of necessity be employed even by those who contradict
them ; and one might consider as perhaps
the strongest proof of a proposition being evident
the fact that even the man who contradicts it finds himself obliged at the same time to employ it. For
example, if a man should contradict the proposition
that there is a universal statement which is true, it
is clear that he must assert the contrary, and say
:
No universal statement is true. Slave, this is not
true, either. For what else does this assertion
amount to than : If a statement is universal, it is false ? Again, if a man comes forward and says, " I would have you know that nothing is knowable,
but that everything is uncertain "
; or if someone
else says, " Believe me, and it will be to your
advantage, when I say : One ought not to believe a man at all "
; or again, someone else, " Learn from
me, man, that it is impossible to learn anything ; it 371
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
(TOL Xeyo) rovTo koI SiSd^a ae, iav 0€\.7}<;'" rivi ovv TovTcov 8ia(p€povaiv ovtoc—Ttve? ttotc ;
—
ol
AKahrjixatKom aurou? Xeyovra ; " & dvdpcoTTOi,
(TvyKaTddecrde on ovhe\<i crvj/earaTldeTai'
TTi(TT€vaaT€ Tjfilv OTi ouSet? TTKnevec ovSevi,"
6 OvTQ}<i Kat, ^KTriKOvpo<;, orav dvaipelv OeXrj rr)v
^vacKtjv KOivmvlav dv0p(OTroi<i 7r/309 dW-qXov^,
7 avT(p tS) dvaipovfxepo) (Tvy)(^prjrai. ri yap Xeyei ; "
H'h €^a7raTda-$e, dvdpcoTTOi, pirjhe irapdyeade
firjSe BcaTriTrT€T€' ovk €<ni (fyvaiKr] Koivcovia rot?
XoyiKoi<i TT/jo? ttX\r;Xou9' irKnevame fioi. ol Be rd erepa XeyovTe'i i^airaTwcnv vpbd<; Koi
8 TrapaXoyi^ovrai.^ ji ovv aoi fieXei ; a<f>€<; r}fid<t €^a7raT7}dr]vai. purj ri •y^elpov diraXXd^ei^, av
iravre^ oi aXXoi Treicrdwp^ev, on ^vaiKr] eanv
r/fMCV KOtvoyvia irpo^ dXXijXov^ Kal ravrrjv hel
ttuvtI TpoTTO) (fivXdcraeiv ; koI ttoXv Kpelaaov
9 KoX d(T(f>aXeaT€pov. dvdpcoTre, ri virep rj/ii<ov (PpovTL^ei^, ri St' i^fid<i dypvirvel^, ri Xv^vov
dirreif, ti iiravlaTaa-at, ri TTjXiKavra jSi^Xia
(Tvyypdcpea ; firj rt? rjjxSiv i^aTraTrjOfj irepl 6ewv
o)9 eTTifieXovp-evcov dvdpcoTTCov rj pLrj rt? dXXr^v
10 ovcriav viroXd^r] tov dyadov rj r/Sovrjv ; el yap
ovro)<i ravra e;^«, ^aXoov xdOevSe Kal to, tov
cTKcoXrjKO^ TTolei, o)v d^iov eKpiva<; aeavrov ecrdie Kal TTLve Kat avvovaLa^e Kal d^oSei/e Kal peyxe.
11 ri Se (Tol fieXei, ttw? ol dXXoi vvoXi^yfrovrai irepl
rovrcov, irorepov vyio)^ rj oii^ vyio><; ; n yap (rol
372
1
BOOK II. XX. 5-1
1
is I who tell you this and I will prove it to you, if you
wish," what difference is there between these persons
and—whom shall 1 say ?—those who call themselves
Academics? "O men," say the Academics, "give
your assent to the statement that no man assents to any statement ; believe us when we say that no man
can believe anybody."
So also Epicurus, when he wishes to do away
with the natural fellowship of men with one another,
at the same time makes use of the very principle
that he is doing away with. For what does he
say ? " Be not deceived, men, nor led astray, nor mistaken ; there is no natural fellowship with one another among rational beings ; believe me.
Those who say the contrary are deceiving you and
leading you astray with false reasons." Why do
you care, then ? Allow us to be deceived. Will
you fare any the worse, if all the rest of us are persuaded that we do have a natural fellowship with one another, and that we ought by all means to guard it ? Nay, your position will be much better
and safer. Man, why do you worry about us, why
keep vigil on our account, why light your lamp, why
rise betimes, why write such big books ? Is it to keep one or another of us from being deceived into
the belief that the gods care for men, or is it to keep one or another of us from supposing that
the nature of the good is other than pleasure ? For
if this is so, off to your couch and sleep, and lead
the life of a worm, of which you have judged yourself
worthy ; eat and drink and copulate and defecate
and snore. What do you care how the rest of
mankind will think about these matters, or whether
their ideas be sound or not ? For what have you to
373
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Kai rjfjLLv ; Tcov yap irpo^aTOiv croi /xeXei, oti
Trape-x^et tj/jlIv avra Kaptjcrop.eva koX afxeX'^drj12
aopeva kuI to TeXevratov KaraK0TTr]cr6p,eva ; ov)(l
S' evKTaiov r]v, el iBvvavTo oi avOpwrroi KuraKif\.T)9evre<i
koI iiraadevTe^ vno TOiv Stcoikcop
aTrovvara^eiv xal 'irape')(ei.v croi Koi rot? 6fioLoc<;
Kapy](To/j,evov<; kuI apek'xdrjcTOfievovs: eavTov<i
;
13 7r/309 7a/) Toi)? 'ZvveTTCKOvpeiov'i eSei ere tuvtu
Xeyeiv, ov)^l 8e irpo^ eKeivovi aTroKpvTneaOai,,
Kcu ^ iroXi) pdXiar eKelvovi 7rp6 ttuvtcov avaireideLv,
otl (pvaei kolvoovlkoX <y€<y6vapLev, oti, 14 ayadov rj iyKpareia, iva aoi irdvTa Trjpfjrai, ; rj TTpo? Tiva^ fJLev Set (^vXarreiv ravrijv rrjv KOivcoviav,
TT/OO? Ttva<; h ov ; irpoq TLva<i ovv hel
Trjpeiv ^ 7rpo9 T0U9 dvTt,Tr]povvra<; 17 tt/jo? tov<;
Trapa^aTiKoyf avTf]<; e-)(0VTa^ ; koX rive^ Trapa-
^aTtKoorepov avjr}^ e^ovaiv vfi&v rtov ravra
8i€iXT](f)6T(ov ; 16 Tt ovv r)v TO eyelpov avrov e/c roiv virvatv Kot
avayKa^ov ypd(f)eiv a €ypa<j>ev ; Tt yap dXXo rj TO irdvTcov tS)v ev dvdp(07roi<i ia^ypoTarov, 17 ^vai<i eXKovaa eTrt to auTrj<; ^ovXrjpa uKovra
16 Kul (nevovra ; " otl yap SoKel aoL TavTa tu
aKOLvwvyjTa, ypdyjrov auTa Kai a\Xot<t aTroXiTre
Kal dypvTTvrjcrov St avTO, Kai avTOf epyw KaT^yo17
po<i yevov TOiv aavTov SoyfidTiov." etTa ^OpeoTrjv
/jb€V VTTO ^Ejpivvdiv iXavvoficvov <f>(ap,ep ex Ttav VTTVcov e^eyeipeaOac toutw 8 ov -^aXeTrcoTepai
al ^Eipivve<i koi Uoivai ; i^/]y€tpov KaOevhovTa
Ka\ ovfc ei'cou -qpepelv, aX\' rjvdyKa^ov i^ayyeXXeiv
TO, avTuv Kaxd uxnrep toi"? TdXXov<; t) fiavia
1 Added by Wolf,
374
BOOK II. XX. 11-17
do with us? Come, do you interest yourself in sheep because they allow themselves to be shorn by
us, and milked, and finally to be butchered and cut
up ? Would it not be desirable if men could be
charmed and bewitched into slumber by the Stoics
and allow themselves to be shorn and milked by
you and your kind ? Is not this something that you
ought to have said to your fellow Epicureans
only and to have concealed your views from outsiders,
taking special pains to persuade them, of
all people, that we are by nature bom with a sense
of fellowship, and that self-control is a good thing,
so that everything may be kept for you ? Or ought
we to maintain this fellowship with some, but not
with others ? With whom, then, ought we to maintain
it ? With those who reciprocate by maintaining
it with us, or with those who are transgressors of it ? And who are greater transgressors of it than you
Epicureans who have set up such doctrines ? What, then, was it that roused Epicurus from his slumbers and compelled him to write what he did ? What else but that which is the strongest thing in
men—nature, which draws a man to do her will though he groans and is reluctant ? " For," says
she, " since you hold these anti-social opinions,
write them down and bequeathe them to others and
give up your sleep because of them and become
in fact yourself the advocate to denounce your own
doctrines." Shall we speak of Orestes as being
pursued by the Furies and roused from his slumbers?
But are not the Furies and the Avengers that
beset Epicurus more savage ? They roused him
from sleep and would not let him rest, but compelled
him to herald his own miseries, just as madness and
375
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
18 KoX olvo<i. ovrco^ ia')(yp6v ti koI aviKrjTov
eaTiv Tj <j)vai<} rj avOpwirivT]. 7rw9 'yap hiivarai
a/inre\.o<; p^rj apTreXiKco^ KivetaOai, aW' iXaiKojs,
Tj eXaia iroKiv prj iXaiKci)<i, dXX^ apTreXiK(o<; ; 19 apri')(avov, d8i,av6r]TOv. ov roivvv ovS' dvOpcoirov
olov re 7ravT€X&J<? diroXeaai ra<i Kivt](T€i^ ra?
dvdpcoinKa'i kuI o'l diroKOTnopevoi rd<; <ye irpo6vpLa<;
Tat; rSiv dvhpoiv dTTOKoyjracrOai ov Svvav20
rat. ovTco'i xal ^KiriKovpo'i rd p,ev dvBpo<i irdvT
dTreKoyjraTO kuI rd OLKoheairoTOv Koi iroXirov
Kol (f)lXov, Ta? 8k irpodvpia^ rd'i dv6p(07riKd<:
ovK uTreKoyfraTO' ov ydp rj^vvaro, ov pdXXov rj oi dTaXaiircopoi AKa8rjp,a'iKol Td<; aladrjcret^ rd<;
avTCOv diro^aXeiv rj d7roTV(f>X(0(Tat 8vvavTat KaiToi
TovTO pdXiara TrdvToov eairouBaKOTe^.
21 'n T779 ^ dTV)(^La<i' Xa^cov Tt<? irapd t^<?
(fiva-eco^ perpa koi Kavova^ ei? imyvcoaiv rrj^
dXrjdeLa<i ov 'jrpo(T(^tXoT€-)(yel tovtoi<; irpoaOelvaL
Kol Trpoae^epydaaaOai rd XeiirovTa, dXXd irdv
Tovvaviiov, tt rt, koX e^^i ^ yvcopiariKov t^<? 22 dXijOelaf, i^aipelv ireipdrai Koi diroXXveiv. rt, Xiyeii;, (f)iX6ao(f)e ; to evaefie^ koX to oaiov irolov
Tt <7ot (f)aLV€Tai ; " dv 6eXr}<i, KaraaKevdao) on
d')a96v" va\ KaraaKevaaov, 'iv 01 TroXlrai rjpS>v €7rto-T/oa<^evTe9 Tipcocri to delov Kal Travacovrai
irore paOvpovvre^ -nepX rd p,eyiaTa. " e^^t^ ovv
23 Td<i KUTaaKevaf ; " e;^a) Ka\ %a/3ti/ ol8a. " eVei
» Schenkl : rl (a added later) ^ S.
« Schenkl : iK^i S.
^ Priests of Cybele who mutilated themselves in frenzy.
BOOK II. XX. 17-23
wine compel the Galli.^ Such a powerful and in- vincible thing is the nature of man. For how can a vine be moved to act, not like a vine, but like an
olive, or again an olive to act, not like an olive,
but like a vine ? It is impossible, inconceivable.
Neither, then, is it possible for a man absolutely to lose the affections of a man, and those who cut off their bodily organs are unable to cut off the really
important thing—their sexual desires. So with
Epicurus : he cut off everything that characterizes a man, the head of a household, a citizen, and a
friend, but he did not succeed in cutting off the
desires of human beings ; for that he could not do,
any more than the easy- going ^ Academics are able to
cast away or blind their own sense-perceptions,
although they have made every effort to do so. Ah, what a misfortune ! A man has received from
nature measures and standards for discovering the
truth, and then does not go on and take the pains to add to these and to work out additional principles
to supply the deficiencies, but does exactly the
opposite, endeavouring to take away and destroy
whatever faculty he does possess for discovering the
truth. What do you say, philosopher ? What is your opinion of piety and sanctity ? " If you wish,
I shall prove that it is good." By all means, prove
it, that our citizens may be converted and may
honour the Divine and at last cease to be indifferent
about the things that are of supreme importance. " Do you, then, possess the proofs f " I do, thank
heaven. " Since, then, you are quite satisfied with
' That is, unwilling to think matters through to a logical end. The raearung of the expression comes out clearly in the following section. VOL. I. O 377
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovv TavTa cot Xiav dpeaKet,, XaySe ra ivavria'
on Oeoi ovT elcriv, et re Kal elaiv, ovk iirifie- Xovvrat av9pcoTroav ovSe kocvov ti rj^lv eari tt/oo? avTov<i TO T eucre/Se? rovro Kal ocriov irapa. toU
TroXXot? avdp(t)7roi.<i \a\ovfievov KaTdyjreverfid
iariv dXa^ovtov dv6poiirwv koI cro^ia-Tcav rj vt)
Ata vofjLodeTMv et? (f)60ov Kal iTricr'X^eaiv rSiv 24 dSiKovvrwv." €v, (f)iX6ao(f)€' oo(f)6Xr](ra<i rjfioiv
Tovi TToXtra?, dveKTrjcro) toi'9 veov<; peirovTa^ ijSt] 25 TT/Jo? KaTa(f)p6vr)aiv rSiv deicov. " ri ovv ; ovk
dpe<TK€i aoi Tavra ; Xd^e vvv, tto)? r) SiKaiocrvvrj
ovhev iaTiv, ttw? rj al8co<; fxcopia iariv, ttw? Trarrjp 26 ovSev icrriv, ttw? o u/o? ovhev iaTiv." ev, (f)cX6-
<TO(f)€' eTTifieve, ireWe roix; viov^, tva •nXelova';
e')(03P'^v javrd cot, ireirovOoTa'i KaX X€yovTa<i. ck
TOVTOov Twv Xoycov r]v^y']driaav rj/jbiv al evvofiovfievai
7ro\et9, AaKeSaifKOP 8ia rovTOv<i tov<;
Xoyov<; iyevero, AvKovpyo<i Tavra ra ireicrfiara
eveTTOirjcrev avroi<: 8id ro>v vofxcov avrov Kal rrj<; TTatSeta?, on ovre ro SovXeveiv alcr)(^p6v earn fidXXov rj KaXov ovre ro eXevdepov; elvai KaXov
fiaXXov rj al(T)(^p6v, ol ev Sep/jL07rvXai<i dirodav6vre<;
8ia ravra rd 86yixara drredavov, Adtjvaloi
8e rrjv ttoXlv 8id iroiovi dXXov<; X6yov<; direXirrov ; 27 elra ol Xeyovre^ ravra yap-ovcri Kal Traihoiroiovvrat
Kal iroXirevovrai Kal lepei<; Kadiardcnv
avrov<i Kal 7rpo(f)7]ra<;. rivwv ; ro)V ovk ovtojv
Kal rrjv TlvOlav dvaKpivovaiv avrol, Iva rd ^ev8ri
TTvdcovrat, Kal aXXoa toi'9 %/3>;cr/ioi'9 e^rjyovvrat.
Q) /j,eydXT]<; dvai(T')(yvria<; Kal yorjrela^.
^ The Athenians twice abandoned their city, once in 480 B.C., and again in 479 B.C., rather than submit to the Persians.
BOOK II. XX. 23-27
all this, hear the contrary : The gods do not exist,
and even if they do, they pay no attention to men,
nor have we any fellowship with them, and hence
this piety and sanctity which the multitude talk about
is a lie told by impostors and sophists, or, I swear,
by legislators to frighten and restrain evildoers."
Well done, philosopher ! You have conferred a
service upon our citizens, you have recovered our young men who were already inclining to despise
things divine. " VV^hat then ? Does not all this
satisfy you .'' Learn now how righteousness is nothing, how reverence is folly, how a father is nothing, how a son is nothing." Well done,
philosopher ! Keep at it ; persuade the young men,
that we may have more who feel and speak as you
do. It is from principles like these that our wellgoverned
states have grown great ! Principles like
these have made Sparta what it was ! These are the convictions which Lycurgus wrought into the
Spartans by his laws and his system of education,
namely that neither is slavery base rather than
noble, nor freedom noble rather than base ! Those
who died at Thermopylae died because of these
judgements regarding slavery and freedom! And
for what principles but these did the men of Athens
give up their city .'' ^ And then those who talk thus
marry and beget children and fulfil the duties of
citizens and get themselves appointed priests and
prophets I Priests and prophets of whom ? Of
gods that do not exist ! And they themselves consult
the Pythian priestess —in order to hear lies and to interpret the oracles to others ! Oh what
monstrous shamelessness and imposture
!
379
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
28 "AvdpcoTre, tl iroiel'i ; avTo<i creavTov i^eXeyx^i';
KaB* rj^epav Kal ov 6eX€i<; a<})€tvat ra -yjrvx^pa
Tavra €Trt,')(^eLprip.aTa; iaOlcov ttov (f)€p€i<i rrfv ')(elpa;
el<i TO (TTOfxa T} eh rov 6(f)da\/j.6v ; \ov6pevo<i irov
efi^aiv€i<; ; irore rrjv 'xyrpav elire'i Xoirdha r) rrjv 29 Topvvrjv 6^e\L(TK0v ; ec TLV0<i avTcov SovXo^ rjl^riv, el Kol ehu fie xaO^ rjp.epav vir' avTOu e/cSepecrdai,
iyci) av avTOv ecTTpi/SXovv. " /9aXe iXdSiov,
iraihdpiov, ei<; to ^aXavelov.^^ e^aXov av ydpiov
Koi d-neXdcov Kara Trj'i Ke(f)aXr]<i avrov Karex^ov. " TL TovTO ; " " i^avTacria p,oi iyeveTo eXaiov
dBidxptroii, 6p,oiOTdTr), vr) rrjv crrjv Tu%7;i/." 30 " So? u)8e rrfv TrrKrdvTjv." rjveyKa av avTW
yepiaa<i wapo-y^iha o^oydpov. " ovk rJTrja-a ttjv
TTTKTdvrjv ; " vat, Kvpie' tovto Trriaavrj ianv.
" TOVTO OVK ecTTLv o^oyapov ; " " tl p,dXXov rj TTTiadvT] ; " " Xd^e Kal 6(r(f)pdvdr)Ti, Xd^e Kal
yevaai" " irodev ovv 0Lha<;, et ai aicrO >jaet<; 31 ripd(; yjrevBovTai ; " Tpel^;, Teaaapa<i, tmv avvZovXo3v
e\ ea^ov opovoovvra^;, dirdy^acrdai av avTOV eTTOirjaa prjyvvp^evov rj peTadeadaL. vvv 5' €VTpv(j)0)aiv Tjpii' Tot<f pev irapa tt}? <f>vaeco<i Bioopi€vot<i
irdai ^/9a;/iei'0f, Xoyo) 8' avTa dvaipovvTe<;-
32 Kv^dpicTTOL y dvOpcoTToi Kal aiSr]pove^. el prjBev dXXo Ka6^ rjpepav dpTOVs e(TdiovTe<i ToXpwat
Xeyeiv on " ovk olhapbev, el ecTTt ti<; Arjptjrrjp i) 33 l^opr) 17 IlA-ouTtov" Xva p^rj Xeyco, on vvkto^ Kal
^ There is an abrupt transition here from the Epicureans
to the Academics.
* Demeter and Kore represent agriculture and the " cornspirit."
Pluto is added as the personification of the darkness
of earth out of which the plants spring, and as the spouse of 380
BOOK II. XX. 28-33
Man, what are you doing ?
^ You are confuting
your own self every day, and are you unwilling
to give up these frigid attempts of yours ? When
you eat, where do you bring your hand .'' To your
mouth, or to your eye ? When you take a bath, into
what do you step ? When did you ever call the pot a
plate, or the ladle a spit ? It' I were slave to one of
these men, even if I had to be soundly flogged by
him every day, I would torment him. " Boy, throw
a little oil into the bath." I would have thrown a
little fish sauce in, and as I left would pour it down
on his head. " What does this mean?" " I had an
external impression that could not be distinguished
from olive oil ; indeed, it was altogether like it. I swear by your fortune." " Here, give me the gruel."
I would have filled a side dish with vinegar and fish sauce and brought it to him. " Did I not ask for the
gruel ? " " Yes, master ; this is gruel." " Is not this vinegar and fish sauce?" "How so, any more than
gruel." " Take and smell it, take and taste it." " Well, how do vou know, if the senses deceive us ? "
If I had had three or four fellow-slaves who felt as I did, I would have made him burst with rage and hang
himself, or else change his opinion. But as it is, such
men are toying with us ; they use all the gifts of
nature, while in theory doing away with them.
Grateful men indeed and reverential : VV'hy, if nothing else, at least they eat bread everv day, and
yet have the audacity to say, " We do not know if there is a Demeter, or a Kore, or a Pluto" 2 • „ot to
Kore, or else, possibly, because he suggests the death of the
grain of com before the new shoot appears. Of. I. Corinth. XV. 36: " That which thou sowest is not quickened, except
it die."
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
r)fiipa<i airdXavovre'i koI fiera^oXSyv tov eTov<;
fcal acnpwv koX Oa\d<Ta7]<; Kal 7^9 Kal tt}? irap
avBpcoTTcov (Twepyeia^; vtt ovSevo^ tovtoov ouSe
KUTo, TTocrov i7ricTrpe(f)0VTai, dWa /xovov i^efxeaai
TO TTpo^XrjfxaTCOV ^rjrovcri Kal tov arofiaxov yv34
p,vdaavTe<i dTreXOelv ev jBaXaveio).^ tl S ipovai
Kal irepl rivo>v rj irpo^ riva^ Kal tl ecrrai avTOi<i
e/c Tojp Xoycov TOVTcov, ovSe Kara ^pa')(y TrecppovTtKaat'
firj tl veo<i evyevrj^; d.Kovaa'i roiv Xoycov
TOVTCOV Trddr) ti vtt avT(ov rj Kal iradcav irdvT
35 diToXearj to, ttji; evyevela<i aireppiaTa' fit] Ttvi piX)L^evovTL d(^op/jLa<; Trapda')(^coix€v tov airavaicr)(^vvTrjaai
tt/jo? to. ytvofxeva' fir) rt? twv vocr<f)i- ^o/Mevcov TO, 8r]/j,6(na e'vpe(ri\oyia<i tivo<; iTriXd^TjTat
dirb TOiv Xoycov tovtwv /xt] Tt? t&v auTov yovemv
djxeXoiv dpd(jo<i tl Kal diro tovtcov irpoa-Xd/Sr}.
Tl ovv KaTO, ae dyaOov fj Kaxov, alaxpov ^ rj 36 KaXov ; TavTa rj ravTa ; tl ovv ; ert tovtwv
Ti<i avTiXeyei tivI r) Xoyov hihcocnv 77 Xafi^avei
37 rj jxeTaireiOeLV ireipuTai ; iroXv vt) Ata jxaXXov
Tov<i Kivaihov<i iXiricTai ti<; av pLeTairelcyeLV rj Tov<; cttI ToaovTov aTroKeKoycfyco/xevovi Kai arroTeTV<pX(OfX€V0V^.
Ka. ITepi dvofioXoyia^.
1 Tmv irepl avrov<i KaKwv^ to, fiev pa5t&)? ofjbo- Xoyovaiv dvOpcoiroi, to, 6' ov pa8Lco<i. ovBeU ovv
1 els ^oKaveiov Schenkl, but cf. I. 11, 32.
2 Added by Wolf.
' rwv . . . KaKwv transferred by Wendland from the end of the preceding chapter.
382
BOOK II. XX. 33-xxi. i mention that, although they enjoy night and day, the
changes of the year and the stars and the sea and the
earth and the co-operation of men, they are not
moved in the least by any one of these things, but
look merely for a chance to belch out their trivial "problem," and after thus exercising their stomach
to go off to the bath. But what they are going to
say, or what they are going to talk about, or to whom,
and what their hearers are going to get out of these
things that they are saying, all this has never given
them a moment's concern. I greatly fear that a
noble-spirited young man may hear these statements
and be influenced by them, or, having been influenced
already, may lose all the germs of the nobility which
he possessed ; that we may be giving an adulterer
grounds for brazening out his acts ; that some
embezzler of public funds may lay hold of a specious
plea based upon these theories ; that someone who
neglects his own parents may gain additional
afTrontery from them.
What, then, in your opinion is good or bad, base or noble? This or that? What then? Is there any
use in arguing further against any of these persons, or
giving them a reason, or listening to one of theirs, or trying to convert them ? By Zeus, one might much
rather hope to convert a filthy degenerate than men
who have become so deaf and blind ! CHAPTER XXI
Of inconsistency
Some of their faults men readily admit, but others
not so readily. Now no one will admit that he is 383
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
o/J,o\o<yrj<T6L OTi a(f>pQ)v iarlv r) dvorjTo^, dWa irdv
TOvvavTLOv TrdvTcov dKOV(T€L<i Xeyovrcov " ox^eXov
2 o)? (f)peva<; e')((o ovTco<i kol tvx^tjv eZ^oi'." BeiXoi)^ 8e paBiO)<i eavTOv<i o/xoXoyovcri Koi Xiyovaiv " iyoi
8ei\6T€p6<; elfit., 6p,o\oy5y ra S' aX,X' ovx
3 evpT](T€L^ /xe fiapov dvOpwirov^ dxparr/ oii pa8i(o<i
o/jLoXoyyjaec ti<;, dSiKov ouS' oXaj9, (pdovepop ov
4 irdvv r) irepiepyov, e\er)p,ova ol TrXelcrToi. ri ovv
TO aiTiop ; TO p,ev KvpicoTarov dvo/xoXoyia kul
rapaxv ^^ "^oi^; irepX dyadSiv Koi KaKwv, dWoi<; S
dWa aiTia koX a')(ehov ocra dv ala'X^pd (f>avTd5
^(OVTUC, Tavra ov irdvv ofioXoyovai' to Se SeiXov
elvai evyvd}fj,ovo^ ri6ov<i (pavTd^ovTai Kol to iXei]/j,ova,
TO S' rjXidLov elvai rravTeXoi^ avSpairoBov
Kal Ta irepl Koivcoviav Se irXrjfip.eXrjixaTa ov irdw
6 7rpocnei>Tai. eTri Se tS)v TrXetcrTayv d/j.apTr]p,aTQ)v
KUTu TOVTO fjidXcaTa (f>€povTac inl to ofioXoyelv
avTd, OTi (f>avTd^ovTaL ti iv avTol<; elvat dicovcnov
7 KaOdirep iv t5> 8eiXa> koX eXeijp^ovi. kuv aKpaTrj
TTov ^ 7rapop.oXoyf} rt? avTov, epwTa TrpoaedrjKev,
(wcTTe (TvyyvwaOrjvai ti? eir aKOVcricp. to S' dSiKov ou8afj,(o<; (^avTd^ovTat uKovaiov. eve ti
Kal T& ^TjXoTVTTO), 0)9 otoVTUl, TOV uKovaiov. Bid
TOVTO Kal irepl tovtov Trapo/xoXoyovaiv.
8 'Ei/ ovv TOiovToi<i dvdpdoTToi'; dvaaTpe<p6/j,€vov,
ovT(o<i T€Tapayp,evoi,<;, ovtw^ ovk elBoaiv ovd 6 tl Xeyovaiv ovO' 6 ti exovaiv KaKov rj el^ €)(ovcnv rf
^ Shaftesbury : ti- ov S. * Supplied by Schenkl. 384
BOOK II. XXI. 1-8
foolish or unintelligent, but, quite the contrary, you
hear everyone say, " I wish I had as much luck as I have sense." But they readily admit that they are
timid, and say, " I am a bit timid, I admit ; but in general you will not find me to be a fool " A man
will not readilv admit that he is incontinent, not at
all that he is unjust, and will never admit that he is envious or meddlesome ; but most men will admit
that they are moved by pity. What is the reason for this? The principal reason is confusion of thought
and an unwillintrness to admit a fault in matters
which involve good and evil ; but, apart from that,
different people are affected by different motives, and,
as a rule, they will never admit anything that thej
conceive to be disgraceful ; timidity, for example,
they conceive to be an indication of a prudent disposition,
and the same is true of pity, but stupidity they
conceive to be a slave's quality altogether ; also they
will never plead guilty to offences against society.
Now in the case of most errors, the principal reason why men are inclined to admit them is because thev
conceive that there is an involuntary element in
them, as, for instance, in timidity and pity. And if a man ever does, grudgingly, admit that he is incontinent,
he adds that he is in love, expecting to l)e
excused as for an involuntary act. But injustice they
do not at all conceive of as involuntary. In jealousy
there is also, as they fancy, an element of the
involuntary, and therefore this too is a fault which
men grudgingly admit.
When such are the men we live among—so confused, so ignorant both of what they mean by
" evil " and what evil quality they have, or whether
they have one, or, if so, how they come to have it, or 385
ARRIAN'S DISCOUEISES OF EPICTETUS
rtrapa ri e^ovcnv r) ttc!)? iravcrovTai avroiv, koX
avTov oi/j,ai icfyKTrdveiu a^iov (Tvve^e<; " fMt] nrov koX
9 avro^ el^ elfit, ixeCvoyv ; riva i^avraaiav e%a) irepX
ifiavTov ; 7ra><; efiavTw 'X^pw/jLai ; p.r) ti koX avrbf
ft)9 (ppovL/jLO), fxrj Ti Kul avTo<i (U9 iyxpaTcl ; firj Kal auT09 \eyco TTore ravra, oti eh to einov
10 TreTTaiBevfiai ; e';^&) r)v Set avvai(ydr}aiv rov firjSev
elSora, oti ov^€v ol8a ; ep')(OfMaL 7rpo<i tov 8ihdOKoKov
CO? eVi TO, y^p'^CTrfpta irelQeaBai "nape-
(TKevacrfjL vo<i ; rj kul avro<i Kopv^rj^; p,e(TTO<; eh rrjv
(T')(o\rjV elarip'X^Ofiai pbovrjv rrjv Icnopiav fiadrjaofievo^
Kal TO, ^i^Xia voijacov, a irporepov ovk ivoovv,
av h ovT(i)<i TvyV' '^'^l aXkoa e^r)yr)a6/xevo<i ; "
11 dudpcoTT , ev ocKfp hiaireTrvKrevKa^; rw hovXapiw,
rrjv oIkluv dvdcTTarov ireiroiTjKa^, tov<; yeiTovw^
avvTerdpaxa'i' koI ep)(r] /xoi KaTacrTo\d<; 7roi7](ra<i
ft)? (ro(f)o^ Kal Ka6)j/jL€vo<i Kpcvetf;, Trw*? e^Tjyr/crdfirjv
rrjv Xe^cv, Trpof * Tt ttot' €<f>\udpi](Ta rd iireXdovra
12 fwi ; (f)Oov(t)v e\T]\vOa(;, reTa7T€ivcofievo<;, oti aoi
i^ oXkov (f)ep€Tai ovSev, Kal Kddrf p,era^v Xeyopievoiv
rcov Xoyrov auTO? ovSev dXXo iv6vp,ovfievo^ rj 13 TTfti? irarrjp rd tt/oo? <t€ rj ttw? o dBeX(f)6(;. " rl^
XiyovcTLV 01 CKei dvdpwTroi irepl e/xov ; vvv otovTai
fie TrpoKOTTTeiP Kal Xeyovatv ore ' rj^et eKelvo';
^ Reiske and Koraea : irais 5.
* Salmasius: rh S.
• Evidently the student depended upon his home for his supplies.
386
BOOK II. XXI. 8-13
how they will get rid of it—among such men I wonder whether it is not worth while for us also to watch ourselves, each one asking himself the
questions : " Is it possible that I too am one of these
people ? What conceit am I cherishing regarding
myself? How do I conduct myself? Do 1 for my
part act like a wise man ? Do I for my part act like a man of self-control ? Do I for my part ever say
that I have been educated to meet whatever comes ? Have I the consciousness, proper to a man who
knows nothing, that I do know nothing? Do I go
to my teacher, like one who goes to consult an
oracle, prepared to obey? Or do I, too, like a
sniffling child, go to school to learn only the history
of philosophy and to understand tiie books which I did not understand before, and, if chance offers, to explain them to others ? " Man, at home you have
fought a regular prize-fight with your slave, you
have driven your household into the street, you have
disturbed your neighbours' peace ; and now do you
come to me with a solemn air, like a philosopher,
and sitting down pass judgement on the explanation
I gave of the reading of the text and on the
application, forsooth, of the comments I made as 1 babbled out whatever came into my head ? You
have come in a spirit of envy, in a spirit of
humiliation because nothing is being sent you from
home,^ and you sit there while the lecture is going
on, thinking, on your part, of nothing in the world
but how you stand with your father or your brother!
You reflect : " What are my people at home
saying about me ? At this moment they are thinking that I am making progress in my studies,
and they are saying * He will know everything
387
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
14 TrdvTa et'Sco?.' rjdeXov ttco<; irore Trdvra fiadoov
enravekOelv, aXXa ttoXXov irovov ^/Je/a Kal oi/Self;
ovSev ire/jLTrei Kal iv Ni/coTroXet craTrp(o<i \ovei ra
^aXavela Kal iv ocko) KaKco^ Kal a)8e KaKM^."
16 Eixa \eyovaiv " ou86t<? axpeXeirai ix T^<r
<r;;^o\779." rt? yap €pj(^6Tai et<? (T')(^oXi]v, ti? 7«/3,
0)9 OepaTTeudrjaofxevo^; ; t49 6t)<? irape^wv avrov to. BoyfiaTa eKKadapdrfcrofieva, Tt? avvai(T6T]a6fxevo<i
16 ripcov Belrai ; ri ovv 6avp,d^eT\ el a <^eper €l<i rriv a')(^o\r]V, avra ravra dirocfyepeTe ttoXlv ; ov yap a)9 dirodriao/jLevoi. rj i7ravopOu)crovT€<i rj 17 aW dvT avTcov \r]ylr6/j,€voi ep'^eade. irodev
;
ouS' iyyv<;. eKelvo yovv ^XeireTe fxdXXov, el
€(i)' o epxeaOe tovto vfitv yiverai. OeXere XaXelv
trepl Twv dewprjfidrcov. ri ovv ; ov (f)Xvap6repot,
ylvecrOe ; ov)(l Se TTap€)(^ei riva vXrjv v/j,iv 7rpo<;
TO iTriSeiKwadat, rd 6€Q}pr}fidTia ; ov ^ avXXoyLcrpom
dvaXvere, p^rairiTnovTa'; ; ovk €<f)oS€veT€
'^evSop.evov Xrip-fxara, viroderLKov^ ; tI ovv €ti dyavaKrelre el e(f)' a irdpeare, raina Xap^^dvere ; 18 " vai' dX,V av diroOdvrj p,ov to TraiSlov rj 6
dSeX(f)o<; r/ ifie d-rroOvrjaKeiv Berj rj arpe^Xovadai,
19 Tt /ie TO, TOiavTa ^ w<f>eX7](Tei ; " p,r} yap cttI tovto
^XOe<i, pr) yap rovTOV evcKd p,ot TrapaKdOrjaat, p,r} yap Bed TOVTO iroTe Xv')(yov rj\jra<; t) rjypvTTvrjcra'i ;
"^ Supplied by Wolf. * Meibom : fxeTo. ravra S.
1 See II. 17, 34, and note. 388
BOOK II. XXI. 13-19
when he comes back home ! * I did want, at one
time, I suppose, to learn everything before going back
home, but that requires a great deal of hard work,
and nobody sends me anything, and at Nicopolis
they have rotten accommodations at the baths, and
my lodgings are bad, and the school here is bad."
And then people say : " Nobody gets any good
from going to school." Well, who goes to school
—
who, I repeat—with the expectation of being cured ? Who with the expectation of submitting his own
judgements for purification? Who with the ex- pectation of coming to a realization of what
judgements he needs ? Why, then, are you surprised,
if you carry back home from your school
precisely the judgements you bring to it? For you
do not come with the expectation of laying them
aside, or of correcting them, or of getting others in exchange for them. Not at all, nor anything like
it. Look rather to this at least—whether you
are getting what you came for. You want to be
able to speak fluently about philosophic principles.
Well, are you not becoming more of an idle babbler? Do not these petty philosophic principles
supply you with material for making exhibitions?
Do you not resolve syllogisms, and arguments with
equivocal premisses ? Do you not examine the
assumptions in The Liar^ syllogism, and in hypothetical
syllogisms? Why, then, are you still vexed, if you are getting what you came for ? " Yes, but if my child or my brother dies, or if I must die, or be tortured, what good will such things
do me?" But was it really for this that you came?
Is it really for this that you sit by mv side ? Did
you ever really light your lamp, or work late at 389
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
rf 6t9 rov TrepiiraTov i^eXOcov Trpoe^aXi'i irore
aavTM (^avraaiav riva dvrl avWoyicr/xov Kul
20 ravTTfv Kotvfj icfxoSevaare ; ttov ttotc ; elra
Xeyere " d-)(priaTa ra deaprjfiara" rtaiv ; toZ? ovx oi<; Set ;3^/)&)/iei'ot9. ra <yap KoWvpca ovk
a^prjcTTa toc<; ore Bel Kal o)? Set iyx^pcofxevoi<;, ra
fiaXdy/xaTa S' ovk a;i^/3?70-Ta, oi aXTrjpe'; ovk
axpr^cTTOi, dXKa tktIv d^pv^'^oi, rialv ndXiv
21 ')^p'i]ai/j,oi. dv pLOV irvvddvrj vvv " ')(pi]aip,0L elcriv
01 (TvXXoyicrpLol, ;" epSi aoi on )(^pi]aip,oi, Kav
OiXrj^, dTTohei^w ttw?. " e'/xe ovv ti 0D(f)6X7]KaaLV ; "
avdpoiire, fiij yap iirvdov, el aol 'X^pija-ipoi, dXXa
22 KadoXov ; TTvOeaOo) p,ov Kal 6 SvcrevTepiKo^, el
'X^pTJa-ip.ov 6^o<i, epS) on )(p7](jip,ov. " ep,ol ovv
')(fi)](TipLov ; " ipco " 01). ^rjTrjcTov irpoiTov cnaXrjvai
<rov TO pevp,a, to. eXKvSpia aTrovXoyOijvac." Kal
u/iet?, avBpe^, to. eXKt] Trpcorov OepaTrevere, to. pevpLara eincrTtjaaTe, r)pepir]aare ttj Siavoia,
direpia-iraa-TOV avrrjv eveyKare eh Tr]v axoXtjv
Kal yvcoaeade oiav la-^hv 6 Xoyo^ ^X^'"
K^'. Tlepl i^iXia^.
1 Tlepl d Tf9 ecnrovSaKev, (piXel ravra et«0T&)9.
p.r] n ovv irepl rd KaKa ia-TrovSdKacriv oi dvdpwtrot
; ov8ap.(o<;. dXXd p.ij n irepl ra pirjBev tt/jo?
390
BOOK II. XXI. 19-XX11. I
night, for this ? Or when you went out into the
covered walk did you ever set before yourself,
instead of a syllogism, some external impression and
examine this with your fellow-students? When did
you ever do that? And then you say, "The
principles are useless." To whom? To those who
do not use them prof>erly. For instance, eye-salves are not useless to those who rub them on when and
as they ought, and poultices are not useless,
jumping-weights are not useless ; but they are
useless to some people, and, on the other hand,
useful to others. If you ask me now, " Are our
syllogisms useful ? " I will tell you that they are, and, if you wish, I will show how they are useful
"Have they, then, helped me at all?" Man, you
did not ask, did you? whether they are useful to you, but whether they are useful in general ? Let
the man who is suffering from dysentery ask me
whether vinegar is useful ; I will tell him that it is useful. "Is it useful, then, to me?" I will say, "No. Seek first to have your discharge stopped,
the little ulcers healed." So do you also, men, first cure your ulcers, stop your discharges, be tranquil in
mind, bring it free from distraction into the school
;
and then you will know what power reason has. CHAPTER XXII
Offriendship
Whatever a man is interested in he naturally
loves. Now do men take an interest in things evil ? Not at all. Well, and do they take an interest in things which in no respect concern them ? No, not
39>
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
2 avrov<i ; ovSe irepX ravra. viroXeiireTai tolvvv
3 trepi fJLOva ra ayada iawovSaKevai avTOv<i' el
5' i(T7rovBaK€vai, xal (piXelv Tavra. 6<TTL<i ovv ayadSiv i7n<TTi]ficov eariv, ovro<; av koX (f>i\ecv
fiheir)' 6 8e firj 8vvdfjL€vo<; BiaKpivai to, ayaOa
airo rSiv KaKOiv /cal to, ovBirepa air' a/JLcporipcov
TTW? av en ovto^ <j>iKecv Svvairo ; rov (ftpovifxov
rotvvv iarl fiovov to (fiiXeiv. 4 Kat 7rw<? ; (prja-cv iyoo yap dcfypojv tov ofio)<; 5 <f)iX(o fiov TO iraiScov.—®avp.d^(o fxev vrj tou?
deovi, TTW? Kol TO irpwTov d)fio\6yrjKa^ d(f>pova
eivai, aeavTOV. tl yap croi Xeiirei ; ov ')(^pfi aLcrOrjcrei, ov (ftavraaLat; hiaKpiveif;, ov rpo<f)a<;
7rpo(r(f>€pr} Ta? eTriTrjSelov^ t& (TcofiaTi, ov a/eeTnjv, 6 ovK oiKrjcTiv ; iroOev ovv op,o\oyel<; d^pcov elvai
;
on vrj Ata iroWaKif; i^iaraaaL vrro tcov (f>avTa-
<ria>v Kol rapdrrr} Kal rjTTwcrLv ere al 7rt0av6Tr]T€<;
avTwv Kal TTOTe fiev ravra dyada vrroXafx^dvei^,
elra eKelva avrd Kaxd, varepov 8' ovSerepa- Kal
o\ft)9 XuTTJ;, ^o^fi, (f)dovei<;, rapdacrr), fxera^dWr]'
7 8ia ravra OfioXoyeis d(})p(t)v elvai. ev Be rut
(f>cXeiv ov fj,era0dWr) ; dWa rfkovrov fiev Kal
qhovrjv Kal dTT\o)<i avra ra rrpdyfiara rrore fiev dyaOa v'no\afi^di'ei<; eivai, irore 8e KaKd- dvOpo)-
TTOu? Se Toy? avrov<; ov^t irore p£v dyadov^;, rrore Be KaKOv^ Kal irore p,ev otVetfw? e^et?, ttotc h
39«
BOOK II. XXII. 1-7
in these, either. It remains, therefore, that men
take an interest in good things only ; and if they
take an interest in them, they love them. Whoever,
then, has knowledge of good things, would know
how to love them too ; but when a man is unable
to distinguish things good from things evil, and
what is neither good nor evil from both the others,
how could he take the next step and have the
power to love.^ Accordingly, the power to love
belongs to the wise man and to him alone.
How so? says someone ; for I am foolish myself,
but yet I love my child.— By the gods, I am sur- prised at you ; at the very outset you have admitted
that you are foolish. For something is lacking in you ; what is it ? Do you not use sense perception,
do you not distinguish between external impressions,
do you not supply the nourishment for your body
that is suitable to it, and shelter, and a dwelling?
How comes it, then, that you admit you are foolish ? Because, by Zeus, you are frequently bewildered
and disturbed by your external impressions, and
overcome bv their persuasive character ; and at one moment you consider these things good, and then
again you consider them, though the very same,
evil, and later on as neither good nor evil ; and, in a word, you are subject to pain, fear, envy, turmoil,
and change ; that is why you are foolish, as you
admit you are. And in loving are you not changeable
? But as for wealth, and pleasure, and, in a
M'ord, material things, do you not consider them
at one moment good, at another bad ? And do you
not consider the same persons at one moment good,
and at another bad, and do you not at one moment
feel friendly towards them, and at another unfriendly,
393
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
eydpS)^; avroh, Kal ttotc fiev iTraivel^, ttotc Se
8 yjreyei^ ;—Nat koX Tavra Trda-^co.—Tt ovv ; 6
€^r]7raTr)/j,evo<; irepi rivo<? SoKel aoi <f>l\o^ eivai
avTov ;—Ou irdvv.—'O Se fierairTcoTio^ iXofievo^
avTov elvat evvov; ^ avTO) ;—Oi^S' outo?.—^'O 6e vvv XoiSopwv fiiv Tiva, va-repov 8e Oavftd^cov ;—
9 OvK 0UT09.—Tt ovv ; Kvvdpia ovBeTror etSe? (raC- vovra Koi irpoairai^^ovTa a}CKr)koi<i, Xv €i7r7)<i " ovSev (f>i\.iK(ioT€pov "
; aXV OTrta? c8r]<;, rl iart
10 ^v\ia, ^d\e Kpia<i 6t9 fiicrov xal yvwar]. ^dXe
Kal aov Koi tov iraiBtov fiecrov dypiSiov Kal
lyvcoarj, ttw? ere to TraiBiov ra'X^ew'i Karopv^ai,
diXet Kal ail to iraiSlov ev^rj dirodaveiv. elra
(TV TrdXiv " olov e^eOpeyjra TeKviov irdXai eKcfie- 11 pet. /9a\e KOpaatBiov KOfiyfrov Kal avro 6 yepoiv (f)iXei KaKelvo^ 6 veo<;- av he, So^dpiov. av
he KivSvvevcrai her), ipel'i Ta9 <f>cova<; Ta<; tov
^AhfitjTOv TraTyOo?*
deXei'i ^Xeireiv ^w?, irarepa S' ov deXeiv
hoK€t<; ; ^
12 oiei on eKelvo'i ovk e(^i\ei to Xhtov Traihiov, ore
fiiKpov Tjv, ovhe TTvpecraovro^ avTov r/yrjovia ovh'
eXeyev TroXXa/ct? OTt " w^eXov eyco fidXXov
etrvpeaaov ' ; etTa eX96vro<i tov 7rpdyfiaTo<; Kal
1 Wolf : ttvovv S.
^ Quoted from memory. That of Euripides give x«'V*'s
dpeiv . . . xo^P*"' SoKeis. That of Epictetus gives both
versions, but the correct version, preceding the incorrect, was bracketed by Elter.
^ Euripides, Ahestis, 691, Browning's translation. Cf. the
critical note. Adnietus had been reproaching his father for not being willing to die in bis stead. 394
BOOK II. XXII. 7-12
and at one moment praise them, while at another
you blame them ? —Yes, I am subject to exactly
these emotions.—What then ? Do you think that
the man who has been deceived about someone can
be his friend? —No, indeed. —And can the man
whose choice of a friend is subject to change show
good will to that friend ?—No, neither can he.
—
.\nd the man who now reviles someone, and later on admires him ?—No, neither can he. —What
then ? Did you never see dogs fawning on one
another and playing with one another, so that you
say, "Nothing could be more friendly"? But to
see what their friendship amounts to, throw a piece
of meat between them and you will find out. Throw
likewise between yourself and your son a small piece
of land, and you will find out how much your son wants to bury you, the sooner the better, and how
earnestly you pray for your son's death. Then you
will change your mind again and say, "What a child
I have brought up ! All this time he has been ready
to carry me to my grave." Throw between you a
pretty wench, and the old man as well as the young
one falls in love with her ; or, again, a bit of glory.
And if you have to risk your life you will say what
the father of Admetus did : "Thou joyest seeing daylight : dost suppose
Thy father joys not too ? " * Do you imagine that he did not love his own child
when it was small, and that he was not in agony
when it had the fever, and that he did not say over and over again, " If only I had the fever instead " ? And then, when the test comes and is upon him,
395
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
13 iyylaavTO^; opa olfat <f>ci)va<i acpidaiv. 6 'Ereo/cX,?;?
/cat o l\o\vv€LKr]<i ovk r^aav e/c rrj^ avTT]^ firjTpo^
Kat rov avTov irarpo^ ; ovk rjcrav avvTedpap-jxevoi,
avfi^e^icoKore^, av/jL7r€TraiK6Te<;,^ av^KeKOifii]-
fievoL, TToWdKi<i dWij\ov<i KaTairef^iKr^KOTe^ ; o)(TT 6t Tt9 olfiai elBev avTov<;, KarejeXaa-ev av Twv (f}ikoa6(f)(ov i(f) olv Trepl ^tXt'a? rrrapaho^o14
Xoyovaiv. aW i/jb'7rearov<Tr)<i et? to fiiaop wairep
Kpeci}<; Trj<i rupavvlSo<i opa ola Xiyovar
TTOV TTore (TTijaj} irpo irvpyotv ;—a)<? ri pH elpatra<i
ToSe ; ^—
aVTird^ofiai ktcvcov ere.
—
Kdp,e toOS' epci)<; €')(eL. Koi ev')(ovrai evx^(; roidaSe.
16 K.ad6\ov ydp—p,T) i^aTrardaOe—Trdv ^a)0V
ovBevl ovrcof wKCLwrat, d)<i to) IBlq} av/xcpepovTi. 6 Ti av ovv Trpn^ rovTO (ftaivrjTai avrca ipiroSi^etv,
dv T d8eX(f)0'i fi rouTO dv re irariip dv re tckuov
dv T €pd>p,€V0<t dv T epa(Trr)<;, pnael, Trpo^dX16
Xerat, Karapdrai. ovSev yap ovrco<; (ptXelv
7r€<pvK€v ft)9 TO avTov avp,(f)€pov' Tovro trarr^p
Kal dB€X(p6<; Kal avyyevel'i Kal TraTpt? Kal ^eo?.
17 oTav yoi'v et? rovro €p,7To8t^€iv rjiJ-lv at Oeol
hoKwaiv, KaKeivovi Xoihopovpev Kal rd i8pvp,aTa
avTCOv KaTaarp6(j)op,€v Kal rov^ vaov<; ip-iriTrpo)-
pev, wairep ^ AXe^avhpo<i eKeXeucrev ep7rpr]a0P]vai
18 rd WcTKXTjTreia d'7roOav6vTO<; rov ipwpevov. Sid
T0V70 av pev iv ravru) Ti<i dfj ro crvpcf)€pov Kal
^ Reiske {simul luserunt Schegk) : <rvfj.Treiraix<iTes Bentley, Koraes : (rvfj.7re-ira>K6res S, Schenkl.
* (eipwToj) Bentley : ipatrats. rwiS' 8. Cf. the marginal
BOOK II. XXII. 1 2-18
just see what words he utters I VV'ere not Eteocles
and Polvneices born of the same mother and the same
father? Had they not been brought up together,
lived together, played together, slept together, many
a time kissed one another ? So that I fancy if anyone
had seen them, he would have laughed at the
philosophers for their paradoxical views on friendship.
But when the throne was cast between them, like a
piece of meat between the dogs, see what they say
:
Eteo. Where before the wall dost mean to stand ?
Poll/. Why asked thou this of me .'' Eleo. I shall range myself against thee.
Poly. Mine is also that desire ! ^ Such also are the prayers they utter.^
It is a general rule —be not deceived—that every
living thing is to nothing so devoted as to its own
interest. Whatever, then, appears to it to stand in the way of this interest, be it a brother, or father, or child, or loved one, or lover, the being hates,
accuses, and curses it. For its nature is to love
nothing so much as its own interest ; this to it
is father and brother and kinsmen and country and
God. When, for instance, we think that the gods
stand in the way of our attainment of this, we revile even them, cast their statues to the ground, and
burn their temples, as Alexander ordered the temples
of Asclepius to be burned when his loved one died.^
For this reason, if a man puts together in one scale
* Euripides, Phoenissat, 621 f. ' In vv. 1.365 ff. and 1373 ff,, where each prays that he
may kill his brother.
• Hephaestion ; cf. Arrian, Anabasis, VII. 14, 5. gloss ipanqs in Marc. 471 on Phocnissae, 621, where the MSS.
give iffTopfis, and Trans. Am. Philol. Assoc., LII. 49. 397
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TO oaiov Kal to koKov koI TrarplBa koI yovel'i
Kal ^l\ov<;, am^eTai tuvtu irdvTa' av 8* dWa-
')(ov jxkv TO (TVfj,(f)€pov, aX,Xa%oi) Be Toix; <f>iXov<i Kal Tr}v iraTpiha koX tou9 avyyevel'i Kal avTO to
BiKatov, oi')(^€Tai irdvTa TavTa Kara^apovfxeva
19 VTTO Tov av/j,(f)€poi>ro<i. ottov yap av to " iyo)
Kal TO " ifiov," eKel dvdyKr] peTreiv to ^wov ei iv crapKi, eKei to Kvptevov elvar el iv irpoatpeaec,
20 eKel^ elvar el iv toI^; e'/cro?, e'/tet. el tolvvv eKei
elfjic ijco, ottov -q Trpoaipecn^, out&j? fjL6v(o<i /cal
(jii\o<i eaofiai olo<; Bel Kal ut09 fcal iraTrfp. tovto
ydp fxoi avvoiaei Trjpelv tov ttkttov, tov alhrjpova,
TOV dveKTLKov, tov d(f)€KTiKov Kal (Tvvepyr}-
21 TiKov, <f)v\d(Taeiv ra? a)(^eaei<:' av S" dWaxov p.ev ipavTov dcii, aXX-a^ov he to KaXov, ovto)^ l(T)(ypi<;
yiveTUL 6 'EiTTiKOvpov Xoyo^, drro(^aiva>v rj fiijBev
elvai TO KaXov rf el apa to evho^ov.
22 Ata TavTTjv ttjv dyvoiav Kal ^AdrjvaLOi Kal
AaKeBacp,6vwi Biec^epovTO Kal %r]^aXoi 7rpo<i dp(j)oTepovi
Kal p,eya<; ^acn\ev<; irpo'i ttjv 'RWdBa
Kal MaKeBove'iTrpo'} dp-(f)OTepov<; Kal vvv 'P(w/xa?of
Trpo? Fera? koI eVt irpoTepov to, ev lXt&) Bta
23 TavTa eyeveTO. 6 ^A\e^av8po<; tov MeveXdou
^evo<i rjv, Kal eX rt? avToix; elBev (j)i\o(f>povovp,evov<;
dW^\ov<;, rjiria-Tijcrev av to) XiyovTi ovk
elvai (f)L\ov^ avTov<i. aW' e^Xijdr] eh to fieaov
peplScov, KopL-^ov yvvaiKapiov, Kal irepl avTOv
24 7roA.6yu.09. Kal vvv OTav tBy^ ^iXov^, dBeXtpoix;
^ Upton (after Schegk) : iKf7vo S,
1 That is, the things with which a man identifies himself and his personal interest. 398
BOOK II. xxn. 18-24
his interest and righteousness and what is honourable
and country and parents and friends, they
are all safe ; but if he puts his interest in one
scale, and in the other friends and country and
kinsmen and justice itself, all these latter are lost because they are outweighed by his interest. For
where one can say "I" and "mine," to that side
must the creature perforce incline ; if they ^ are in the flesh, there must the ruling power be ; if they
are in the moral purpose, there must it be ; if they
are in externals, there must it be. If, therefore, I am where my moral purpose is, then, and then only,
will I be the friend and son and the father that I should be. For then this will be my interest—to keep my good faith, my self-respect, my forbearance,
my abstinence, and my co-operation, and to maintain
my relations with other men. But if I put
what is mine in one scale, and what is honourable
in the other, then the statement of Epicurus assumes
strength, in which he declares that " the honourable
is either nothing at all, or at best only what people
hold in esteem."
It was through ignorance of this that the Athenians
and Lacedaemonians quarrelled, and the Thebans
with both of them, and the Great King with Greece,
and the Macedonians with both of them, and in our days the Romans with the Getae, and yet earlier than any of these, what happened at Ilium was due
to this. Alexander was a guest of Menelaus, and
if anyone had seen their friendly treatment of one
another, he would have disbelieved any man who
said they were not friends. But there was thrown
in between them a morsel, a pretty woman, and to win her war arose. So now, when you see friends,
399
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
OfjLOvoelv BoKovvra^, firj avrodev drroiptjvr] irepi
tt)? (f>i\i.a'i ri avTWV firjh' av ofivvcoaiv firfS" av
a8vvdTQ)<i e')(eLv Xe^axrti/ aTTrfSXaxGai dXkrjXwv.
26 ovK €(TTt TTiaTov TO Tov (f)av\ov rjyefioviKov' dfii- ^acov icTTiv, CLKpnov, dWod^ vir dX\.T)<; (pavra26
crta? viKcofievov. aXV i^eraaov firj ravO' a oi dWoi, el CK Twv avT(t)v yovecov koI ofiov dvaredpafifxevoi
Kai inro ro) avrat TraiBaycoyo), dXX"
eKelvo fiovop, ttov ro avficpepov auTot? TiOevrai,
27 TTOTepov e/CT09 5? ev irpoaipeaei. av ckto^s, fir)
el'rrri<i (f)lXou^ ov pudWov rj 7naT0v<i rj ^e^aiov<;
rj 6appa\eov^ ^ iXeuOepovi, dWd firjS^ dvOpda28
7rou9, el vovv e^et?. ov yap dvOpcoiriKov 8oy/j,a
eaTi TO TTOiovv SuKveiv dWi'jXovi rj ^ XoiSopeladai
Kal Ta? iprip,ia<; KaraXap^fidveiv rj Ta<? dyopa<; &)? Orjpia^ rd opr], Kol ev Tol<; BiKaarrjpioL<i
dTToheiicvvcrdat, rd XrjaToyv ovhe to dxpaTei?
Kal fiocxovf Kal (pOopeU direpya^o/jLevov
ovS* ocr' dXXa irXr^ppLeXoiKTiv avOpui'TTot, Kar
dXXrjXwv^ Bi ev Kal fiovov tovto B6yp-a, to ev
rot<; d'npoaipeTOi<i Tideadai avT0v<i Kal rd eavToyv.
29 dv S' dKovaT]<;, on rai^ dX^)6tiai<i ovToi ol dvdpcoTTOi
€K€t p.6vov oiovTai TO dyaOov oTTov Trpoaipe<Ti<i,
OTTOV ')(^pr}(JL<i opOr) (fyavraaiMV, /xrjKCTi
TroXv7rpayp,ov)']ar]<; pijT el vl6<; Kal Trarijp icni
^ Capps : Kol S.
* 6i)i>ia. supplied by Capps.
• The correct punctuation of this passage (colons after
a.Trfpfa<^6(iivov and a\A'^A.a>»') is due to Capps.
400
BOOK II. XXII. 24-29
or brothers, who seem to be of one mind, do not
instantly make pronouncement about their friendship,
not even if they swear to it, nor even if they
say that they cannot be separated from one another.
The ruling principle of the bad man is not to be
trusted ; it is insecure, incapable of judgement, a prey now to one external impression and now to another. Nay, do not make the same enquiry that
most men do, asking whether two men are of the same parents, or were brought up together, or had
the same school attendant, but this, and this only : Where do they put their interest—outside themselves,
or in their moral purpose ? If outside, call them not friends, any more than you would call them faithful, steadfast, courageous, or free ; nay,
call them not even human beings, if you are wise.
For it is no judgement of human sort which makes
them bite (that is revile) one another, and take to the desert (that is, to the market-place) as wild
beasts take to the mountains, and in courts of law
act the part of brigands; nor is it a judgement
of human sort which makes them profligates and
adulterers and corrupters; nor is it any such thing
which makes men guilty of any of the many other
crimes which they commit against one another ; it
is because of one single judgement, and this alone
—
because they put themselves and what belongs to themselves in the category of things which lie outside
the sphere of moral purpose. But if you hear these
men assert that in all sincerity they believe the good
to be where moral purpose lies, and where there is the right use of external impressions, then you need
no longer trouble yourself as to whether they are son and father, or brothers, or have been schoolmates
401
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
firjT el dSeXcfiol firjT el iroXvv 'X^povov (TVfnr€<f)OirrjKoref;
Kai kralpoi, aWa fiovov avro tovto
yvov^y dappSiv d7ro(f)ai.vov, ort, <j>L\ot,, oxnrep oti
80 TTiaroL, on SiKaioi. irov yap dXkaxoO <f>t\.ia
f) OTTOV TTLari^i, OTTOV alSco^, oTTOv Bdaif; ^ rov
KaXov, Tcov S" aXXcov ov8ev6<i
;
31 " 'AXXa TedepdirevKe fM€ Toa-ovra 'x^povof koI
ovK e(f)L\€i /ie ; " iroOev oi8a<;, dvhpdrrohov, el oi/T&)9 redepdirevKev co? rd vTTohi']pbara (Tiroyyl^ei
rd eavTov, to? to KTrjvo<; kt€vl<€i ;
^ iroOev olBa<;, el TTjv y^peiav (t drco^aXovra tt]v tov crKevapiou
32 pixfrei co? Kareayo^i ttivukiop ; " dWa yvvr) p,ov earl Koi toctovtw '^(^povai avfi^e^icoKa/xev." irocrw
5' rj 'Epi(f)v\rj fierd tov ^ A.p,^iapdov koi Texvcov
p,7]Tr)p Kol TToWwv ,* aXX' op/xo<; rjXOev ei? to
33 p.eaov. t'l K e'cTTiv 6pp,o^ ; to Soyp^a to Trepl tcov ToiovTcov. €K€Lvo Tjv TO dtjpicoSe^;, €Kelvo TO 8iaKOTTTOV
TT)v (fiiXiav, TO OVK iwv elvat, yvvalKa
34 yapLeTrjv, fiTjTepa ^ p.riTepa. koX vp.o)v oaTis
ecTTTOvhaKev rj avTo^ tcvi* eivai ^Lko<i tj aWov
KTi'jaaaOai ^CKov, tuvtu tu Soyp-aTU e/c/coTTTeTO),
TavTU p.ic7r]adTco, Taina e^eXacrdTco eK Tfj<{ 36 "v/^f^^? T^9 iavTov. Kal ovTOi<; eaTai TrpwTov
p.ev auTo? eavTM p,r) \oi8opovp,evo'i, fir) p-a^o36
p-€vo<i, pLT} p,€Tavo(ov, p,Tj ^aaavi^cov kavTov- eireiTa
Kal eTeprp, tw p.ev 6p,oiq) iravTr] d7rXov<i,^ tov
S" dvopLoiov dveKTLKO^, 7rpao<i tt/so? avTov, rip,epo<i,
^ ^lihoais Schweighauser : h6(Tis kuI \rj\f/ii Shaftesbur}'
:
OfVij Elter (after Schegk). » KTfvk'fi supplied by Capps.
' T^y before fxr^Ttpa deleted by 8chenkl.
^ Schenkl (after Schegk) : ns S.
* Capps, combining iroj-TT? {ndvTti) of Schweighauser and
air\ovs of the Salamanca edition : ttovtI airXws S. 402
1
BOOK II. XXII. 29-36
a long time and are comrades ; but though this is the
only knowledge you have concerning tiiem, you may
confidently declare them "friends," just as you may
declare them "faithful " and " upright." For where
else is friendship to be found than where there is fidelity, respect, a devotion^ to things honourable
and to naught beside ? " But he has paid attention to me all these years
;
and did he not love me ? " How do you know,
slave, whether he has paid attention to you just as he
sponges his shoes, or curries his horse ? How do
you know but that, when you have lost your utility, as that of some utensil, he will throw you away like a broken plate ? " But she is mv wife and we have
lived together all these years." But how long did
Eriphyle live with Amphiaraus, yes, and bore him
children, and many of them ? But a necklace came
in between them. And what does a necklace signify r One's judgement about things like a necklace. That
was the brutish element, that was what sundered
the bond of love, what would not allow a woman to be a wife, a mother to remain a mother. So let every one of you who is eager to be a friend to somebody himself, or to get somebody else for a
friend, eradicate these judgements, hate them, banish
them from his own soul. When this is done, first of all, he will not be reviling himself, fighting with
himself, repenting, tormenting himself: and, in the
second place, in relation to his comrade, he will be
always straightforward to one who is like him himself,
while to one who is unlike he will be tolerant,
gentle, kindly, forgiving, as to one who is ignorant
1 For 5o<rj$ in this sense (not in L. and S.), see Thes. L.G.
s.v. and especially' R. Hirzel: Unterbuch. zu Cie. Philos. Sehr. II. (1882), 563, n. 1 ; BonhofiFer 1890: 286, n. 1. 403
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
avyyicofiovLKOf; co? 7rpo<? dyvoovvra, co? tt/jo? SiaTTiTnovTa
Trepl roiv yueyiaroav ovSevl ')(a\eTr6<i, ar €t3<w? aKpi^oi<t ro rov Il\dT(ovo<;, oti Trdaa
37 y^vyr] uKOVcra arepeTcu rr]<; dXrjdeiaf:. el Se fit], Ta fiev aXKa irpd^ere irdvra ocra oi <f)i\oi Kal
crvp,m€lade Kal (TvaKrjvrjcrere Kal crv/xTrXevaere
Kal eK ro)v avrSiv yeyevrjixevoi eaeade' Kal yap
Ol 0(j>et'i. <f>LX0L S' OUT €K€LVOl Ovd' Vp.el<i, pLe')(^pL<s av ex^rre ra drjptcoSr) ravra Kal p,iapd Soyp-ara.
Ky'. Hepl T^? Tov \eyeLV Svvdp,e(o<;.
1 Bt/SXtov vra? dv rjBiov dvayvcor) ^ Kal pdov to
€V(T'r]p,orepoL<i ypap.pacn yeypappevov. ovkovv
Kal Xoyovs 7rd? dv ti<; paov uKOvaeie ^ tou?
€V(TXi]poaiv ap,a Kal evirpe-jrialv ovofiaai aearj2
p^(jp,evov^. ovK dpa rovro pr^reov, &>? ovSepia
hvvapl<; eariv dirayyeXriKr]- tovto yap dpM
fikv d(T€^ov<; iaTiv dvOpcoirov, dpa Se SeiXov.
dae^ov^; p,ev, on rd<; rrapd tov Oeov j^^dpiTat;
aTip-d^et, waTTcp el dvrjpei ttjv ev\prjaTiav tj}?
opaTiKrj^ rj tt}? dKovaTLKrj<i 8vpdp,eco<; r) ainrft;
3 Trj<i <f)(ovT)TiKr]f:. eiKT) ovv (TOL 6 deo<i Q(^da\pu)v<i
ehwKev, eiKfi irvevpxi evexepaaev avTol<i ovtco<;
i<T)(^vpov Kal (^L\6Te\yov, cocrTe p,aKpdv e^iKvovfievov
dvapdaaeadai tou? tvttov^ twv opa>p.ev(i)v ;
' Koraes : avayvu fi S. * Schenkl : aKova-et S.
1 Of. I. 28, 4.
* In Stoic physiolog}- the spirit of vision connected the
central mind with the pupil of the eye, and sight was
produced by the action of this spirit upon external objects,
404
BOOK II. XXII. 36-xxiii. 3 or is making a mistake in things of the greatest
importance ; he will not be harsh with anybody,
because he knows well the saying of Plato, that " every soul is unwillingly deprived of the truth." ^ But if you fail to do this, you may do everything
else that friends do—drink together, and share the same tent, and sail on the same ship—and you may
be sons of the same parents ; yes, and so may snakes ! But they will never be friends and no more will you,
as long as you retain these brutish and abominable
judgements.
CHAPTER XXIII
Of the faculty of expression
Everyone would read with greater pleasure and
ease the book that is written in the clearer characters.
Therefore everyone would also listen with greater
ease to those discourses that are expressed in
appropriate and attractive language We must not,
therefore, say that there is no faculty of expression,
for this is to speak both as an impious man and
as a coward. As an impious man, because one is thereby disparaging the gifts received from God, as though one were denying the usefulness of the
faculty of vision, or that of hearing, or that of speech
itself. Did God give you eyes to no purpose, did
He to no purpose put in tliem a spirit* so strong
and so cunningly devised that it reaches out to a
great distance and fashions the forms of whatever
not by the passive reception of rays. See L. St«in,
Psychologie der Stoa (1886), 127-9 ; Erkenninistheorie der Stca
(1888), 135 f. ; A. Bonhoffer, EpikUt und die Sioa (1890), 123 ; and for the origins of this general theory, J. I, Beare, Greek
Theories of elementary Cognition (1906), 11 fiF. 405
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
4 Kal TTolo<i a<yy€\o<; ovto)<; cokv^ koI e7rifM€\7]<; ; elKjj Se Kal rbv [xera^v depa outo)? evepyov iTroirjo-ev Kal
evTovov, ware St' avTOv Teivo/nevov ^ 7rco<; huKveladai
Tr)i> opacriv ; cIkj} 8e (pa)<; eiroirjaev, ov fJirj iTapovTO<i ovhevo<i rwv aWcop 6(f)€\o<i rjv; 5 AvOpcoire, p,r}T a)(dpLaro<; ladi f^^jTe ttoXiv
apivrjpioiv Tcov KpeicrtTovayv, a\X virep /xev tov
opav Kal UKOveiv Kal vrj Ata VTrep avrov
TOV ^r)v Kal rcbv avvepySyv 7rpo<; auro, virep
KapTTWv ^rjpcov, virep otvov, virep eXaiov
6 €V)(api(TT€i Tft) de^' p,envr)ao S' on, aWo ri aoi
BeBcoKev Kpelrrov airdvratv tovtcov, to -x^prjcro- fievov avTOi^, to SoKCfidaov, to tt)v d^iav CKaaTOV
7 Xoyiovpievov. tC yap ecrrt to d7ro<paiv6pevov
VTrep eKdarTr)<i tovtcov tS)v 8vi'dp,p(ov, TToaov
Tt9 d^ia ecnlv avT&v ;
p,rj ti avTrj eKdcnri -fj Bvvap,(<; ; fir) ti t?}? 6paTiKr]<; ttot r)Kov(Ta<i Xeyovar}<i
ti irepl eauT^9, p,rj ti t?}? dKovaTiKrj^ ;
- aW' ft)9 SidKovoi Kal SovXai TCTaypivai elalv
8 VTrrjpeTeiv ttj %/0?7crTt/c^ rwy ^avTaaiMV. kclv
TTvOrj, TToaov eKaarov d^iov iaTiv, tlvo<; TTVvdavrj
; Tt9 (TOL diroKpLveTai ; irS)^ ovv SvvaTai rt? dXXr) 8vvap.i<i Kpeiaacov elvai TavTi]^, t] Kal rat?
Xonrai<i hiaKovoi^ XPV"^^^ "•"^ BoKip,d^et, avTrj
9 GKacTTa Kal d'no(paiveTai ; Tt? yap eKelvccv olhev,
Tt<> icTTiv avTT} Kal TToaov d^ca ; rt? eKeivcav
olhev, OTTOTS hel y^prjaOat avrfj Kal iroTe fit]
;
' Wolf : yivoixivov S.
^ The words fxi] n irvpciv ; fj,^ ri KptOay ;
fX'f) ti Tirirov ; fi-fi n
Ktv6s ; "Or wheat, or barley, or a horse, or a dog?" which
follow at this point in ^S*, were deleted by Schenkl (after
Schweighauser) as being out of keeping with the context. 406
BOOK II. xxiii. 4-9
is seen ? And what messenger is so swift and so attentive as the eye ? And did He to no purpose
make also the intervening air so active and so intent ^ that the vision passes through it as through some
tense medium ? And did He to no purpose create
light, without the presence of which all else were
useless ? Man, be neither ungrateful for these gifts, nor
yet forgetful of the better things, but for sight and
hearing, yes and, by Zeus, for life itself and for what is conducive to it, for dry fruits, for wine, for
olive oil, give thanks unto God ; and at the same
time remember that He has given you something
l)etter than all these things—the faculty which can make use of them, pass judgement upon them,
estimate the value of each. For what is that which,
in the case of each of these faculties, shows what it
is worth ?* Is it each faculty itself? Did you ever hear the faculty of sight say anything about itself? Or the faculty of vision ? No, but they have been
appointed as servants and slaves to minister to the
faculty which makes use of external impressions.
And if you ask, what each thing is worth, of whom
do you ask ? Who is to answer you ? How, then, can any other faculty be superior to this which both
uses the rest as its servants, and itself passes judgement
upon each several thing and pronounces upon
it? For which one of them knows what it is and
what it is worth ? Which one of them knows when
one ought to use it, and when not? What is the
* That is, firm, taut, elastic, bo as to be sensitive to the
action of the spirit of vision, and not dull and yielding like mud or putty.
' For the general theme, see I. 1. 407
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Tt9 iariv rj dvoiyovaa fcal KXeiovcra tov<; 6(f)0a\-
jj,ov^ KoX d(/)' wv hel aTTO<TTpec^ovaa, toi? he
Trpoadyovaa ; 17 opaTiKyj ; ov, dXX! rj irpoatpeTiKi].
T19 1] ra (ora eTriKXetovaa Kal dvoijouaa ; 10 Tt9, KaO^ yjv TrepiepyoL Kal irevdrjve^i rf ttoXlv
aKivqToi, VTTO Xoyov ; rj aKOVcrTiKrj ;
^ ovk dWr)
11 ^ 77 TrpoaipeTiKT) 8vvafxi<;. elr avrrj IBovaa, otl
iv TV(f)Xai<; Kal KO)(f>ai<i ral<i dWai^ aTrda-ais
hvvdfieaiv iari jxr^he n dWo avvopdv hvvafievai<i
TrXrjv avrd eKelva rd epya, ecf)' oh Tsray/xevat
elcrl StaKoveiv ravrr) Kal vinjpereiv, avTrj Be fwvr)
o^v ^Xeiret Kal rd<; t' dWa^ KaOopa, nroaov eKaaTT) d^la, Kal avnjv, /xeXXei rjfuv aXXo tc d-TrocpaLveadaL to Kpdriarov elvai 7) av-rriv ; Kal
12 Tt TTOiel dXXo 6(f)0aX/jLO<i dvoi,^6el<i rj opa ; el Be
Bel TT]v Tov rivo<; ISeiv yvvalKa Kal ttw?, T19
13 Xeyet ; rj TrpoaipertKT]. el Be Bel iricTTevaai, toI<; Xe-)(^dtlaiv rj dirccrTrjaat, Kal TncrrevcravTa epedi14
aOrjvai Pj fxij, tl<; Xeyei ; ovx V "TpoaiperiKrj ; rj Be
<f)paaTiKrj avTrj Kal KaXXcoTrtcrTiKr] twv ovojidrwv,
€i Ti9 dpa IB'ta Bvvajii<;, tl a\.Xo iroiel rj, orav
e/JLTrecTT} X0709 rrepi Tti/09, KaXXwrrii^ev rd 6voju,dTia
Kal (TvvTidrj<Tiv wmrep ol Kopficoral ttjv Ko/xrjv ; 15 iTorepov 8' elirelv ajxeivov rj aicoTrijcrai Kal GVTa)<;
dfien ov rj eKeivwi Kal tovto Tvperrov rj ov irpeirov,
Kal rov Kaipov eKuarov Kal ttjv -)(peLav Tt9 dXXrj
Xeyei rj rj TrpoaiperiKrj ; OeXei^ ovv avrrjv irapeXdovcrav
avTrj<; Kurayfrrjcfyiaaadai;
^ Upton from his "codex" (after Wolf): ^ aKovcrriKoi S. 408
J
BOOK II. xxiii. 9-15
faculty that opens and closes the eyes, and turns
them away from the things from which it should turn
them, but directs them toward other things? The
faculty of sight? No, but the faculty of moral
purpose. What is the faculty that closes and opens
the ears? What is that faculty by virtue of which
men are curious and inquisitive, or again, unmoved
by what is said? The faculty of hearing? No, it is none other than the faculty of moral purpose.
W'hen, then, this faculty sees that all the other
faculties which surround it are blind and deaf, and
unable to see anything but the very acts for which
they have been appointed to serve and minister
unto it, while it alone sees clearlj- and surveys, not
only all the rest, determining what each is worth,
but itself also, is it likely to pronounce that anything
else is supreme but itself? And what else can the
open eye do but see ? But whether it ought to see someone's wife and how, what faculty tells it?
That of moral purpose. And what faculty tells a man whether he ought to believe what he has been
told, or disbelieve, and, if he believes, whether he
ought to be provoked by it or not ? Is it not that
of moral purjx)se ? And this faculty of speech and
of the adornment of language, if it really is a separate
faculty, what else does it do, when discourse arises about some topic, but ornament and compose the
words, as hairdressers do the hair? But whether
it is better to speak than to keep silence, and to do so in this way, or in that, and whether this is appropriate or not appropriate, and the proper
occasion and utility of each action—what else tells us all this but the faculty of moral purpose ? Would
you, then, have it come forward and condemn itself? VOL. I. P 409
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
16 It ovv, (prjcTLV, et ourct)? to irpajfia e'X^ei, Kai Bvvarat to Siukovouv Kpeccraov elvai ckclvov
cS oiaKovei, o i'tttto? tov I'mreoi'i rj 6 kvcov tov
Kvvrjyov 7) TO opyavov rov KcOapiarov r) oi
VTrriperaL rov ^a<Ti\eco<i ; " —Tiiari to 'x^pwjj.evov; 17 '7rpoaipecn<;. tl eTrifJieXeiTacTravTcov ; Trpoatpeai';.
n 6\ov dvaipet tov dvdpcoirov iroTe /xev \ifiq>, TTOTe 8' ayyovrj, iroTe Se KaTa Kprjp^vov ; Trpoai18
peai<;. eiTa tovtov t'l laxvpoTepov iv dv6pco7roi<i
icTTCV ; KOl TTOi^ oloV Te TOV CLKCdXvTOV TO,
19 K(o\v6/j,eva ; ttjv opaTiKrjv 8vvafx,iv Ttva 7re(f)VK€v
ip,7ro8t^€iv ; koI irpoaipecnt Kal dirpoaipeTa}
Tr)v cLKovaTiKrjv TavTo,, tyjv (f)pacrTCKr]v aiaavraxi.
Trpoaipeatv Se Tt efnroSi^etv irec^vKev ; dirpoaipCTOv
ovSev, avTT) 8' kavTrjv SiaaTpacpeccra. 8ia
tovto KUKia p,6vr] avrrj yiveTat rj dpeTrj povrj. 20 EtTa TrfKiKavTT] Svvapii; ovaa Kal Trdai Tot? aWot,^ i7TiT€Tayp^v7j irapeXOovaa -qplv XeyeTco
KpCLTLCTTOV clvai TCOV OVTWV Tr)V (TapKU. ovSk el avTT) r] (Tap^ eavTrjv eXeyev elvai KpaTiaTov,
21 'qvecT')(eT0 dp Ti? avTrj<;. vvv he tI eaiiv, 'Etti- Kovpe, TO TavTa dirocjiaivopevov ; to irepl TeXof?
avyyeypa<p 6^, to to, ^vcriKa, to irepl K.av6vo<i ;
* Salmasius : vpoaipfrd S.
' This passage is very obscure in the original and it may
well be that something is missing before § 16 which would
make the objector's question more plausible, or else after the
first part of the question, so that the remainder would belong
to the answer by Epictetus. It is not impossible that the whole paragraph, §§ 16—19, is derived from a separate context and fitted in here rather badly by Arrian himself or by some 410
BOOK II. xxiii, i6-ai " What then," says an objector, " if the matter
stands like this, and it is possible for that which serves
to be superior to what it serves—the horse to the
rider, or the dog to the hunter, or his instrument
to the harper, or his servants to the king ? " ^ Well,
what faculty is it that uses the services of the rest
in this way? Moral purpose. What is it that
attends to everything? Moral purpose. What is it that destroys the whole man, sometimes by hunger,
sometimes by a noose, sometimes by hurling him
over a cliff? Moral purpose. Is there, then, anything
stronger than this among men ? Yet how
can the things that are subject to hindrance be
stronger than that which is unhindered ? What are by their very nature capable of hindering the faculty
of vision ? Both moral purpose and things that lie outside its sphere. The same hinder vision ; and
so it is also with speech. But what is by its very nature capable of hindering moral purpose?
Nothing that lies outside its sphere, but only itself when perverted. For this reason moral purpose
becomes the only vice, or the only virtue. Therefore, since it is so great a faculty and has
been set over everything else, let it come before
us and say that the flesh is of all things the most
excellent. Nay, even if the flesh itself called itself most excellent, one would not have tolerated such a
statement. But now what is it, Epicurus, that makes
such a declaration ? that composed the treatise
On the End, or The Physics, or On the Standard ?
^ ancient reader or editor, because essentially it does no more
than repeat the preceding paragraph.
• Famous works by Epicurus, of which the first treated
ethics and the third epLstomology, the "standard" being a standard of judgement or criterion. 411
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TO rov TTMycova KaOeiKo^ ; to fypac^ov, ore
a7redvT)(TK€v, oti " ttjv reXevraiav a'yovre<i afia
22 Kol /jbaKapiav rjfjbepav ;" rj aap^ rj ij irpoaipeai^ ; elra tovtou n Kpelcraov ex^tv ofioXoyet'; Koi ov
fiaivr) ; ovT(o<; TV(f)Xo<i rat? a\r]Oetai<; koX K(0(f>6<; ei;
^ 23 Tt ovp ; aTi/Jid^ei rt? Ta9 aWa<; BvvdfX€i<;; fit} yivotTO. \iyet rt? /j.r]8efiLav elvai %/Detaj' r) 7rpoay(oyT}v e^co ^ Tr]<i 7rpoaip€TiKrj<i Bwdfieco^;
;
fiTJ yevoiTo. dv6r)Tov, dcre^e<i, d^dpiaTOV tt^o? TOP deov. dWd rrjv d^iav eKdcnw aTTohihcocTLV. 24 eart, fydp ri<i Kol ovov ;j^/9ei'a, dXX' ovx rjXiKrj ^o6<i'
etTTi Kal Kwof, dW' ov^ tjXlki] oIk€tov eaTt
Kol olKerov, dW! ov^ rfKiKri rcov iroiXnuiv' earn
26 Kol Tovrojv, dW ou% rjXiKr) t(ov dpxovrcov. ov
fiivTOt 8t,d TO dWa elvai Kpeirrova koI rjv
TTapex^t' Ta erepa p^^/aetai^ dTi/xaa-reov. ecrTt Tf9
d^la Kal T^9 (f)paaTiKr]<; 8vvdfj,€(o<;, aX\' ou%
26 rfXiKri rrjf 7rpoaip€TiKr]<;. OTav ovv ravra Xiyo),
fii] Ti9 oleadco OTi dfieXeiv vfjid<; d^tcb (f}pdaeQ}<;'
ovBe yap 6cf)daXfji6!)v ovB' (orwv ovSe ^etpoii' ovBe
27 irohwv ovB^ icrOrjTO'; ovB' VTroBrj/xdroyv. dXX' dv
fiov irvvddvrj " ri ovv iari KpdriaTOv to)V ovtojv ;"
^ Supplied by Schenkl.
^ That is, assume the role of a philosopher, compare L 2, 29, and note.
^ A slight variation from the standard form of the famous
saying of Epicurus on his death-bed. See Usener, Epiciirea,
p. 143, 16fif., and especially Diog. Laert. X. 10, 22: "And
when he was at the point of death, he wrote the following
letter to Idomeneus: ' We have written this letter to you on
a happy day to us, which is also the last day of our life. For
412
I
BOOK II. xxin. 21-27
that caused you to let your beard grow long?^
that wrote as it was dying : " We are spending
what is our last and at the same time a happy
day?"2 Was it the flesh or the moral purpose?
Come, do you confess that you have something
superior to the flesh, and you are not insane, either?
Are you, in all truth, so blind and deaf?
Well, what then ? Does a man despise his
other faculties ? Far from it I Does a man say
there is no use or advancement save in the faculty
of moral purpose? Far from it! That is unintelligent,
impious, ungrateful towards God. Nay, he is but assigning its true value to each thing. For there is some use in an ass, but not as much as there is in an ox ; there is use also in a dog, but not as much
as there is in a slave ; there is use also in a slave,
but not as much as there is in your fellow-citizens
;
there is use also in these, but not as much as there
is in the magistrates. Yet because some things are superior we ought not to despise the use which the
others give. There is a certain value also in the
faculty of eloquence, but it is not as great as that
of the faculty of moral purpose. When, therefore,
I say this, let no one suppose that I am bidding you
neglect speech, any more than I bid you neglect
eyes, or ears, or hands, or feet, or dress, or shoes.
But if you ask me, " What, then, is the highest of
strangury has attacked me, and also a dysentery, so violent that nothing can be added to the violence of my sufferings.
But the cheerfulness of my mind, wliich arises from the
recollection of all my philosophical contemplations, counterbalances
all these afflictions. And I beg you to take care of the children of Metrodorus, in a manner worthy of the devotion shown by the yoath to me, and to philosophy.'"
(Yonge's translation.)
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
Tt eiTTU) ; Tr)v (ppaariKijv ; ov hvvafxai' aWa ttjv 28 TrpoacperiKtjv, orav opdrj jevrjTai. rovro <ydp
icTTi TO KaKeivr) )(^p(o/jLCVov KoX raU aXXai?
7rd(Tai<; koX fiiKpai<i /cal /xeydXaif; Bwd/xecriv
TOVTOV KaTop6(o6evTo<; dya6o<i dv6pu)iro<i yiverai}
29 ttTTOTeu^^ei/TO? KaKo<i dvdpco7ro<; yiveTai' irap' o arvxpyp-ev, evrvxovfiev, u€fi(f)6fj,ed^ dWi]\ov<;,
evapearovfiev, aTrXoi? o XeXrjOo'i^ fiev KaKohaifxoviav
TToceiTai, Tvyov S' iirifieXeia'i evBaLfiovlav.
30 To S' aXpeiv rrjv Supufiiv tt)? (ppacrriKT]^ kcu
\eyeiv firj elvai firjheplav rat? dXrjdeiai'; ov p.6vov
d')(^apicnov icrTi tt/oo? Tov<i SeScoKOTU^, dWd kuI
31 BeiXov. 6 yap toiovto^; (f)o^eladai fioi SoK€l, fit], elirep iari ti? 8vvafj,i<i Kara rov roirov, ov
32 hvvr]65ifxev avTrj'i Karac^povrjcrai. TOiovToi elcri Kal 01 X€yovT€<; p,rj8efiLav elvai TrapaXXayrjV
KoXXovi 7rpo9 al(T')(o^. elra o/ioto)? rjv KLvrjdrjvai rov Sepcrirrjv Ihovra Kal rov 'A;^tX.Xea ; o/iotto? 33 rrjv'EXevrjv Kal ffv erv^e^ yvvalxa ; Kal ravra
ixatpd Kal aypOLKa Kal ovk elBorcov rrju eKdarov
(^v(TLv, dXXa (f)0^ov/uLeva)v /j,rj dv ra aiady]rat rfjf
Bia(f)opd'i, evdv<; avvapTracrdel'; Kal r)rrr]del<; 34 direXdrj. dXXa to jjbiya rovro, dnoXiTrelv eKdcrrcp
rrjv avrov Bvvafiiv rjv e%ei Kal diroXLirovra IBelv
rr)v d^lav rr]<; Svvdfi€0}<; koI ro Kpdrccrrov rtov ovrcov KarafiaOelv Kal rovro iv Travrl fieraBtcoKeiv,
irepl rovro ecrirovBaKevai, trdpepya raXXa tt/jo?
* The word ayadhs before yivfrai was deleted by
Salmasius.
• Sb : KeXriOfv S : Schenkl suggests i/xeKridfy : neglecla
Wolf.
3 Upton: flx'S. 4M
BOOK II. xxm. 27-34
all things?" what shall I say? The faculty of elo- quence ? I cannot ; but rather that of moral purpose,
when it becomes a right moral purjiose. For it is this which uses not only that faculty of eloquence but
also all the other faculties both small and great
;
when this has been set right a man becomes good,
when it has failed a man becomes bad ; it is through
this that we are unfortunate, and are fortunate,
blame one another, and are pleased with one
another ; in a word, it is this which, when ignored,
produces wretchedness, but when attended to produces
happiness.
But to do away with the faculty of eloquence and
to say that in all truth it is nothing is the act not
merely of a man ungrateful to those who have given
it, but also cowardly. For such a person seems to me to be afraid that, if there really is a faculty of
this kind, we may not be able to despise it. Such
also are those who assert that there is no difference
between beauty and ugliness. What ! could a man
be affected in the same way by the sight of Thersites
and that of Achilles ? Or by the sight of Helen
and that of some ordinary woman } But these are the notions of foolish and boorish persons who do
not know the nature of each several thing, but are
afraid that if a man notices the superiority of the
faculty in question he will immediately be carried
away by it and come off worsted. Nay, the great
thing is this : to leave each in the possession of his own proper faculty, and, so leaving him, to observe
the value of the faculty, and to learn what is the
highest of all things, and in everything to pursue
after this, to be zealous about this, treating all other
things as of secondary value in comparison with it, 415
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TOVTO ireTTOiTj/jLevov, ov fievroi afieXovvra ouS'
35 iK€LVQ)v Kara Swa/Miv. kuI yap 6(f)6a\/jL(Ji)v eVfyue-
\rireov, ciW ov)(^ a)<? rov KpaTicrTOV, aWa koI
rovTwv 8ia to KpariaTOV oti i/ceivo ovk dXXoo<; e^et Kara (f>vai,v el /j,t) iv TovTOt<; euXoyicrTOVv Kul
TO, erepa irapa to, erepa aipovfievov.
36 Tt ovv ecrri to yivofievov ; olov el ti<; amtov el<; rrjv TTUTplSa rr/v eavrov Kal SioSevcov iravhoKelov
KaXov apecravTo<; avrw tov iravhoKeiov KUTafxevoi
37 iv tS> rrravSoKeco). dvOpco-rre, eireXddov aov t^?
irpoOeaewi' ovk €l<; tovto oiheve'i, aXXd Bia tovtov.
" dXXd Ko/xyfrov tovto." iroaa S' dXXa TravBoKela
38 KO/j,ylrd, ttoctoc Se Xet/xcore?' d7rXa><; a)<? StoSof. to
Be rrpoKeipLevov eKeivo- et? Trjv TraTplSa eiraveXdelv,
T0v<i oiKeiovi uTraXXd^ai Beov^, avTov ra tov
ttoXItov TToieiv, jTJfiai, Trai8o7roiela0ai, dp^ai Ta9
39 vo/jLi^Ofj,eva<i dp^d<;. ov yap TOV<i KO/J,yjroTepov<;
ripJiv TOTTOvi €KX€^6fievo<; eX'^Xvda'i, aXV ev oZ? eyevov Kal 0)v KaTaTCTa^at ttoX/t/;?, ei* tovtoi<;
dvaarpa(f)7jao/n€vo'i. tolovtov ti Kal evTavOd ecTTi 40 TO yLvojjievov. eirel Bid Xoyov Kal ToiavTrj^ jrapaB6(TeQ}<;
eXdelv errl to reXeiov Bel Kal Tr]v avTOV
Trpoalpecriv eKKaddpai Kal tijv Buvafiiv ttjv XPVcTTiKijv
Tcov (pavTaaicov opOrjv KaraaKevduai,
avdyKYj Be ttjv irapdBocnp yivecrOat Bid tivcov ^ OecoprjfidTOiv Kal Bid Xe^eo)? iroid^ Kal fierd TLV0<i 41 TToiKiXia^ Kal Bpi/jiVTrjro<; tcov decoprj/xdrtov, utt'
^ 5ia Tivvv Kronenberg : rHv S.
* Compare the 8aj'ing ascribed to Jesus by the Great Mogul Akbar as inscribed on a gatewaj' of the ruined city
Futtey-poreSikri in India. "Jesus had said: ' Tlie world
416
BOOK ir. xxiii. 34-41
though without neglecting these, as far as this is possible. For we must take care of our eyes too,
yet not as the highest thing, but we must take care of them for the sake of the highest ; because this latter will not have its natural perfection unless it uses the eyes with reason and chooses one thing
instead of another.
What, then, generally takes place ? Men act
like a traveller on the way to his own country who
stops at an excellent inn, and, since the inn pleases
him, stays there. Man, you have forgotten your
purpose ; you were not travelling to this but through
it.^ " But this is a fine inn." And how many other
inns are fine, and how many meadows—yet simply
for passing through. But your purpose is the other
thing, to return to your country, to relieve the fear
of your kinsmen, to do the duties of a citizen yourself,
to marry, bring up children, hold the customary
offices. For you did not come into the world to
select unusually fine places, I ween, but to live and
go about your business in the place where you were
born and were enrolled as a citizen. Something
like this takes place also in the matter which we
are considering. Since a man must advance to perfection through the spoken word and such
instruction as you receive here, and must purify his own moral purpose and correct the faculty which
makes use of external impressions, and since the
instruction must necessarily be given by means of
certain principles, and in a particular style, and
with a certain variety and impressiveness in the
is but a bridge, over which you must pass, but must not
linger to build your dwelling.' " See Resch, Agrapha (1906),
DO. 95, p. 292. 4x7
P2
ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
avTO)v TiV€<i TOVTwv dXicrKOfievoi fcaTafiivovdiv
avTOv, 6 fiev viro rrj<i Xefeo)?, o h' viro <tvWoyiafi&v,
6 B' vTTo fieraTrnrTovTcov, 6 8' vir' aXXov
TLvo^ ToiovTov TTavBoKclov, Kal ITpocTfieivavre<i KaracrrjiTOVTai, &)9 Trap a rat? Xeiprjaiv.
42 AvdpcoTre, ro wpoKeipievov rjp croi KaraaKevdaai
cravTOV 'x^prjcniKov ral? 7rpoaTri7rrovcrai<; <pavTa-
(7Lai<i KUTa (l>vcnv, ev ope^ei avairorevKrov, iv 8' iKKXLaei aTrepLTTTtoTOV, ixrjheiror aTV^ovvra, fir]- BeTTore BvcrTVXovvTa, eXevdepov, aKcoXvTOV, avavdlyKacTTOv,
(TwapfMo^ovra rfj rov Afo? BiocKijcrec,
ravrrj ireiOofievov, ravrrj evapecnovvra, firjBeva
fjL€/ji(f)0/ji,€vov, fjbrjBiv atTicopepov, Buvdp,evov elneiv
Tovrov^i Tou? cTTt^j^ou? €^ o\rj<; y{ru)(^r]<; ayov Be fi, a> Zev, Kal av y 77 YleTrpcopbevr]. 43 elra rovro ro trpoKeip-evov e^^ov dpecravT6<; aoi
Xe^eiBiov, dpeadvrcov deoopTjfxdTcov tlvwv avrov
Karap,evei<i Ka\ KaroiKeiv irpoaipfj i7ri\a06/jLevo<;
Twv €v oiK<p Kol \e76t9 " ravTa Ko/nyfrd iariv "
;
Ti<i yap \eyei firj civat avra Kop.yjrd ; aXX,' (09 44 BioBov, a>9 iravBoKcia. rl yap KooXveL <f>pd^ovTa
* In Sncheiridion 53 the other three verses are quoted
:
" To that goal long ago to me assigned.
I'll follow and not falter ; if my will Prove weak and craven, still I'll follow on." They are derived from a poem of Cleanthes (Von Amim,
Stoicnrum Veterum Fragmenta, I. frag. 527). For a somewhat
indifferent translation of them into Latin, see Seneca, Epist., 107. 11, who adds as a fifth verse in the pointed stj'le characteristic of him : DucurU volentemfaia, noleiUem trahunt. " The willing are led by fate, the reluctant dragged." It is not impossible that the sentiment here expressed may be
418
BOOK II. xxiii. 41-44
form of these principles, some persons are captivated
by all these things and stay where they are ; one is captivated by style, another by syllogisms, another
by arguments with equivocal premisses, another by some other " inn " of that sort, and staying there they
moulder away as though they were among the
Sirens.
Man, your purpose was to make yourself competent
to use conformably with nature the external
impressions that came to you, in desire not to fail in what you would attain, and in avoidance not to
fall into what you would avoid, never suffering misfortune,
never ill fortune, free, unhindered, unconstrained,
conforming to the governance of Zeus,
obeying this, well satisfied with this, blaming no
one, charging no one, able to say with your whole
heart the verses, beginning : " Lead thou me on, O Zeus, and Destiny." ^ And then, although you have this purpose, because some petty trick of style, or certain principles, catch
your fancy, are you going to stay just where you
are and choose to dwell there, forgetful of the
things at home and saying "This is fine"? Well,
who says that it is not fine ? But only like a passageway, like an "inn." For what is to prevent
one of the remote and probably unconscious inspirations of Cardinal Newman's celebrated hymn,
"Lead, Kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom
Lead Thou me on !
"
For his mind being haunted by "some texts of this kind,"
i.t., that "God meets those who go in His way," etc., see Ward's Life of John Henry Cardinal Newman, I. 55. 419
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
0)9 Arjfioadevrjf: arv)(elv ; ri he KcoXvet avWoyt.(T/xov<:
avoKvovra ox? ^pvaLTrrro'^ aOXiov elvai,
•uevdelv, (pOoveiv, aTrXw? rapdaaeadai, KUKohai45
fiovelv ; ovhe ev. 6pa<i ovv on iravhoKela rjv
ravra ov8€v6<; a^ia, to Se irpoKeifievov aXko rjv. 46 ravra orav Xeyco tt/jo? riva<;, otovrai fxe Kara-
^dWeiv rrjv Tvepl to Xiyeiv iirifieXeiav rj irjv irepX
rd deu)pi]p.ara. iyoo B' ov ravnjv Kara^dWci},
dXX.d TO Trept ravr aKaraX^jKriKco^ ^ ^X^''^ '^^''
4tl ivravda riOeadai, Ta? aurcov eA-vrtSa?. ei Tt? rovro irapiardf; ^Xdirrei tou? aKovovrai;, xdfie
riOeaOe eva roiv ^Xairrovrcov. ov Svvafiat B' aXXo ^XeTTcov ro Kpdriarov kuI ro Kvpnorarov
dXXo Xeyeiv elvai, Xv vpXv x^apucra/xat,.
kB'. Tlp6<i riva rwv ovk rj^icofievwv vtt' avrov.
1 EtTTovTO? avrw rt,vo^ on IToWa/ci? iirtdvficov aov aKovcrat i]XOov 7rpo<i ae Koi oiiBeirore fioi 2 aTre/cpLVQ)' Kal vvv, ei Bvvarov, TrapaKaXo) ere elirelv ri fioi, ^o/cel aoL, €(f)T], Kaddirep dXXov
Tivo^ elvai rexvrj ovru)<i Be /cat toO Xeyeiv, rjv 6
p,ev e^wv e'/i7ret/3&)9 epel, o Be fir) e')(U)V d-neipco^ ; —
3 AoKel. —OvKOVv 6 /xev Bid rov Xeyeiv avr6<i re
(ocpeXovfievo'i Kal dXXov<; oio<; re cov cocpeXeiv ovro<i
€p7reipQ)<i dv Xeyoi, 6 Be ^XaTrrofxevof; pidXXov Kal
^Xdirrcov ovro<; direipo^ dv elrj rrj<i rex^Vi ravT7]<;
T^9 rov Xeyeiv; evpoi<i dv rov<i fiev ^Xa7rrofievov<s
* Upton's " codex " : ravra Kara\r]KriKcos S. 420
BOOK II. XXIII. 44-xxiv. 3 a man having the eloquence of Demosthenes and
yet being unhappy, and what is to prevent him
from analyzing syllogisms like Chrysippus, and yet
being wretched, from sorrowing, envying, in a word,
from being disturbed and miserable ? Absolutely
nothing. You see, then, that these were "inns " of no value, while your purpose was something else. When I speak thus to some people they think that
I am disparaging the study of rhetoric or that of
general principles. Yet I am not disparaging this,
but only the habit of dwelling unceasingly on these
matters and setting one's hopes in them. If a man
does his hearers harm by presenting this view, set me down too as one of those who work harm.
But when I see that one thing is highest and
supreme, I cannot say the same of something else, in order to gratify you, my hearers.
CHAPTER XXIV
To one of those whom he did not deem tvorthy
Someone said to him : I have often come to you,
wishing to hear you and you have never given me
an answer ; and now, if it be possible, I beg you to say something to me. He answered : Do you think
that, just as in anything else there is an art, so there is also an art in speaking, and that he who
has this art will speak with skill, while he who does
not have it will speak without skill } —I do.—Then
he who by speaking benefits himself and is able to benefit others would be sj>eaking with skill, while
he who confers injury rather than benefit would be
without skill in this art of speaking } You would vou 1. Q 421
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
4 Tov^ B' a>(f)e\oufievov<;. oi h' aKovovret irdvre'i co(f)€\ovvTai d(f)' wv aKovovaiv rj koI toutcov evpoi<; av Tov<i /lev ci)(j)€\ovfj,€vov<i rov<i Be ^\a7rro/j.ipov<i
;
—Kai rouToiv, etprj. —Ovkoup kuI evravOa ocroi
fiev ifjLireipcoii aKOvov(n,v oi<^e\ovvraL, oaot, S' aTTsi- 5 p&)9 ^XdiTTovTai ;—'D./jLoXo'yei.—"Ko-tiv dpa rt?
e/xTreipla Kaddtrep rov Xeyeiv outq)<; kuI tov
6 aKoveiv ;—"Eoi/cei'. —Et he ffovXei, ical ovtw^
(TKcyfrai avTO. to p.ov(JiKO)<i dyjraaOai tIvo^ aoi
7 SoKel
;
—MoutTfACoO.—Tt hi ; rov dvSpidvra co? Set KaracTKevda-ai rivo^ crot (f)aLveTai ;—'AvBpiavTOTTOLov.—To
Ihelv epLTTelpco^ ov8€fMid<i (Toi irpoaSeicrBai
(f)alv€Tai tc^vt;? ;
—
TlpocrSelTai KalrovTO.
8 —OvKovv el Kal to Xeyeiv a)? Set tov ifnreipov
iaTiv, 6pa<; OTI koX to aKoveiv oxpeXlfica^ tov
9 e/jLTreipov earlv ; koIto p,ev reXeio)? koI a)0eXt/i&)9,
el ^ouXei, 7r/309 to trapov d<^Sip,ev, eireX Kal puaKpdv
10 ia-fiev dp,(f)6T€poi Trai^TO? toO toiovtov ifcelvo Se
•TTa? dv Tt? op.oXo'yrjcral fioi Bokci, oti Troaij^ ye
Tivo<; TpijSP]*; irepX to aKoveiv TrpocrBeiTai 6 twv
(ptXoaocjicov aKOV(T6p.evo<i. rj yap ov
;
11 Yiepl TtVo? ovv Xeyco Trpo<; ere ; Bei^ov fiot. irepl
tlvo<; uKovaai Svvaaai ; irepX dyadojv Kai kukcov;
Tivo<; ; dpd ye lttttov ;—Ov.—'AXXa /9oo9;
—
Ov.
12 —Tt ovv; dvOpcoTTOv
;
—Nat.
—
OiSap-ev ovv, tC ecTiv dvOpQ}7ro<;, Ti? t; ^vai<i avrov, ti? tj evvoia
;
exofjuev Kal Karh Troaov irepl tovto ^ t^ (ara
* Schweighauser: rov S. 422
BOOK II. XXIV. 3-12
find that some are injured and others benefited.
And are all those who hear benefited by what they
hear, or would you find that of them too some are benefited but others injured?—Yes, that is true
of them also, he said.—Then in this case too are all those that show skill in listening benefited, but all those that do not show such skill are injured ? —He
agreed. —Is there, therefore, also a certain skill in listening, just as there is in speaking ? —So it seems. —But, if you please, look at the matter from
this angle also : whose part do you think it is to handle an instrument musically.''—The musician's. —Very well, and whose part does it appear to you
to be to make a statue properly.''—The sculptor's.
—
Does it appear to you to require no art to look at a statue with skill.?—This also requires art.—If, then, to speak as one ought is the part of a skilled
person, do you see that to hear with benefit to himself is also the part of the skilled person ? Now
as for perfection and benefit, if you please, let us drop the consideration of them for the present, since
both of us are far removed from anything of that
sort; but this I think everyone would admit, that
the man who is going to listen to the philosophers
needs at least a certain amount of practice in listening.
Is it not so ? What, then, shall I talk to you about ? Tell me. What are you capable of hearing about? About
things good and evil ? Good and evil for what ? Do you mean for a horse ? —No. — Well then, for an ox?—No. —What then? For a man ?—Yes. —Do
we know, then, what a man is, what his nature is, what the concept of man is ? And have we ears that are to any degree open with regard to this?
4iS
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
T€Tpr}fi€va; aWa (jivaa ri iariv ivvoei<i rj 8upacrai
Kol Kara ttoctov uKoXovdrjaai fioc XeyovTt
;
13 aX,X' UTToSel^ei ')(^pijao/jUii irpo^ (re; irco'i ; irapaKo\ovdel<;
'yap avra> tovtm, tL eariv aTroSei^i'i rj 7rco9 Tt aTToheiKwrai rj 8ia Tcvoiv ; rj riva Ofioia 14 fiev aiTohei^ei iariv, a7r6Bei^i<; S' ovk ecrrip ; tL yap iariv a\rid€<; 6lBa<; r) rt tart yfrevSo^ ; ri ti'vi aKoXovdei, ri tlvi fid')^eTai rj avo/jLoXoyov/juevov
icTTiv rj d(TVfi(pcovov ; dWa /civc!) ere tt/jo? (f)i\o<TO- 15 (f>Lav ; TTco? TrapaSeiKvvco aoi Tr)v /xaxv^ t&v
TToWatv dvOpdoTTWv, Kad^ r\v Bia^epovTat irepl
dyaOoiv Ka\ kukcov koL avfji/^epovTcov Kul daviJ,<^opO)V,
aVTO TOVTO tL i(TTl ^d'^T] OXJK. elSoTt ; ^ Sei^ov ovv fwt, Tt irepavSi 8ia\€y6/j,€v6<; aoi. Kivqaov
16 /tot irpoOvfiiav. eo? rf KaTdWrfKo<i iroa Ta> irpo-
/9aT6i) (^avelaa irpodvixiav avTa> Kcvel Trpo? to
(payelu, dv he XtOov rj dprov Trapadfj^, ov Kiprjdr]-
aerai, ovtq)^ elai tcv€<; rjfilv if)V(ri.Kal 7rpo6v/xiai Kai
TTyoo? TO \eyeLv, orav 6 aKovaopbevo^ (f)avr] Tt?, orav
auTo? ipediar]. dv h' 609X1^09 rj')(^opro<i 77 TrapaKCi17
fievof, 7rco9 Svvarai dvdpcoircp ope^iv Kivrjcrai ; ij dfJLTTeXof fit] Tt \eyei tm yetopyo) " eirt/jLeXov fiov ; aX,V avTTj 81 avTp]<i efKpaivovaa, on eTTifMeXtjdevTi
\vcrLre\rjaei avT(i>, eKKaXelrai 7r/309 t^v iiri/xe- 18 Xeiav. rd iraihia rd iridavd kuI Sptfiea tlvu ovk
eKKaXelrai rrpo'} ro aufnrai^eiv aiiroi^ Kal avvepireiv
Kal tt/jo? to avfiylreXXi^eiv ; ovt^ oe Ttv
* Reiske : «i8<{to S. 424
BOOK II. XXIV. 1 2-18
Nay, have you a conception of what nature is, or can you in any measure follow me when I speak ? But
shall I use a demonstration for you ? How can I ? For do you really understand what a proof is, or how anything is demonstrated, or by what means .'' Or what things resemble demonstration, but are not
demonstration ? Do you know, for instance, what is true, or what is false ; what follows what, what contradicts,
or is out of agreement, or out of harmony
with what ? But am I to interest you in philosophy ? How shall 1 set before you the contradiction in the
ideas of the multitude, which leads them to disagree
about things good and evil, advantageous and dis- advantageous, when you do not know what contradiction
itself is? Show me, then, what I shall accomplish by a discussion with you. Arouse in me
an eagerness for it. Just as suitable grass when
shown to the sheep arouses in it an eagerness to
eat, whereas if you set before it a stone or a loaf
of bread,^ it will not be moved to eat, so we have
certain moments of natural eagerness for speech
also, when the suitable hearer appears, and when
he himself stimulates us. But when the would-be
hearer by our side is like a stone, or grass, how can he arouse desire in the breast of a man } Does the
vine say to the husbandman, " Pay attention to me " ? Nay, but the vine by its very appearance
shows that it will profit him to pay attention to it, and so invites him to devote his attention. Who is not tempted by attractive and wide-awake children
to join their s{X)rts, and crawl on all fours with
them, and talk baby talk with them ? But who is
^ The observation of nature is faulty ; sheep will upon
oocasion eat bread, vegetables, and even meat. 4*5
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
irpodv/xelrai avfiTrai^eiv 77 crvvoyKdadai; kuI
yap et fitKpov, o/x.&)9 ovdpiov eartv.
19 Tt ovv fioi ovBev \ey€i.^ ;—'E/eett'o fiovov e')(a) aoi evTrelv, on 6 dyvocov, Tt? ecrrt koI cttI tC yeyovev koI iv rivi rovrtp tS> Koafiw koX psTa
TLVoov KOLvcavSiV KOI TLvu Tck ayaOd eVri koX to,
KaKCL Kol TO, KuXa Kal TO, alcrxpd', Koi p,rjre Xoyw
irapaKoKovdSiv /x^r diroBei^et, p,rj7e rl earvv
dXrjde^ rj tI yjrevSo^, fii]T€ SiaKpivai ravra 8vvdfi€vo<;
ovT ope^erac Kara (fevcriv out' CKKXivei ov6^
opfirjcrei out' iiri^aXelrai, ov avyKaradijcreTai,
ovK dvavevaei,, ovk i(f)€^€i, to (tvvoXov KQ)(f)6<i kuI
TV(f>\o<; trepieXevaerai Sokcov fiev Tt? elvai, oiv 8' 20 ovhel^. vvv yap irpwTOV rovO^ ovtco^ e)(^ei ; ov')(l
i^ ov yevo<i dvdpdoircov eariv, i^ eKelvov iravra
TO, dfiapr^fiara Kal rd dTV)(r]iiaTa irapd ravTrjv
21 TT)v dyvoiav yeyeviqrai ; * AyafiCfivcov /cal ^A^'XXcu?
Sid ri dXX7]Xoi<i 8ie<f)epovro ; ov)(l Sid to
fir} elSivai, riva icTTt (rup.<f>€povTa xal davfi(f)opa ; ov')(l fiev Xeyet, oti avp^ipei dirohovvai t&
irarpl rrjv ^pvcrrjlha, 6 hk Xiyei, on ov avp,(f)epei
;
ov'Xl o fi€v Xeyet, oti Bel avTov Xa^elv to dXXov
yepa<i, 6 Be, oti ov Bel ; ov')(i Bid TavTa iireXd22
60VT0 Kal Tive^ rjcrav Kal evrl Tt iXrjXvdea-av ; ea, dvOpcoTTe, €Trl to iXr]Xvda<; ; ipcofxeva^ KTijaop,evo<i
rj TToXep^rjaoiv ; " 7roX€/jiJ](rci}v" tIcti ; TOt? Tpwalv rj T049 "l^XXrfcriv ; " TOt? Tpcocrtv" d<j>el<i 426
BOOK II. XXIV. 18-22
eager to play witli an ass, or to join its braying ? For however small it may be, it is still nothing but
a little ass. Why, then, have you nothing to say to me ?—There
is only one thing I can say to you—that the man who
does not know who he is, and what he is born for, and
what sort of a world this is that he exists in, and whom
he shares it with ; and does not know what the good
things are and what are the evil, what the noble and
what the base ; and is unable to follow either reason
or demonstration, or what is true and what is false,
and cannot distinguish one from the other ; and will manifest neither desire, nor aversion, nor choice, nor purpose in accordance with nature ; will not assent,
will not dissent, will not withhold judgement—such a man, to sum it all up, will go about deaf and blind,
thinking that he is somebody, when he reallv is nobody. What I do you think that this is something
new ? Has it not been true from the time when the
human race began to be, that every mistake and
every misfortune has been due to this kind of ignorance?
Why did Agamemnon and Achilles quarrel ? Was it not because they did not know what things
are expedient and what are inexpedient? Does not one of them say that it is expedient to give ChryseTs
back to her father, while the other says that it is not
expedient? Does not one of them say that he ought
to get some other man's meed of honour, while the
other says that he ought not? Is it not true that
this made them forget who they were and what they
had come for? Ho, there, man, what have you come
for? To get sweethearts or to fight? "To fight"
With whom ? The Trojans or the Greeks ? " The
Trojans." W^ell, then, are you turning your back on
427
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
ovv rov "KKTopa eTrl top ^acrtXea tov cravTov
23 aird'i to ^L<po<; ; av h\ o) ^ekriare, d<p€l<i ra rov
fiaacXico^ epya,
cS Xaoi T i7rir€Tpd(paTai Koi roaaa [lefxriXev,
irepX KopaaiSiov hiairvKTevei^ ra TroXefiiKcordra)
t5)v (TV/j./iid')(^(ov, ov Bet iravrl rpoiro) irepiiTreiv
Kal (fivXdrreiv ; xal ')(^eipa>v 'ylvr) KOfiyfrov dp)(^i€-
peco<;, 0? Tov^ KaXov'i p.ovop.d'xpv^i Sia 7rdaT]<i
inifxeXeiwi e^^i ; opa^, ola Trotei dyvoia irepX rtov
<Tvp.(^epovra)V ; 24 "'AXXa Kayo) irXoixxLOf; elfit." fMi] ri ovv rov
' AyafM€p,vovo<i TrXovaiiorepo'i ; " aXXa Kai KaXo<i
€t/it. ' jJ-rj rt, ovv Tov 'A^iXXeo)? kuXXlcov ; " dXXd Kal Kop^iov KOfjLyjrov e;^<«-" o S' A')(^tXXev'i ov xdXXiov Kal ^avOov ; Kal ouk ixrevi^ev avro
25 Kop,\lr(o<; ovS" eirXaaaev. " dXXd Kal la^vpof
elfii," firj ri ovv Svvaaai Xidov apai rfXiKov o "EjKrcop r} 6 Am? ; " dXXd Kal evyevri<i" fi'i] ri CK 6ed<i fiTjrpo'i, fiij ri irarpo'i iyyovov Ato? ; rt ovv CKelvov o)(f)eX6L raura, orav Kadrjfievo^ KXacrj
26 8ia TO Kopaaidiov ; " dXXa pTjrcop elfxi." eKeivo<i
S' ovK r/v ; ov /SXeTrei? ttw? Ke')(piirai, roU heivordrois
rcbv 'EAAt^vojv nepl Xoyovs OSvacrel /cat OotVtKt, 7TOJS avrovs darojJLovs 7Te7TOLr]K€
;
^ Homer, Iliad, II. 25, translated by Bryant.
* The reference is obscure ; possibly Chryses is meant
(Wolf and others), but this seems most unlikely, or there may
be a sneering allusion to some contemporary of the philosopher,
who was excessively interested in gladiators (Schenkl).
I am inclined to think rather of Calchas, the high priest of the Achaeans, who treats both Agamemnon and Achilles with more civility than they would seem to deserve, at least 428
BOOK II. XXIV. 22-26
Hector and drawing your sword against your own
king ? As for you, O best of men, are you turning
your back on your duties as king,
Who has the charge of nations and sustains
Such mighty cares,^
and for the sake of a paltry damsel engage in a fist- fight with the greatest warrior among your allies, a man whom you ought to honour and protect in every
way? And do you sink below the level of an elegant
high priest who treats the noble gladiators with
all respect?^ Do you see the sort of thing that
ignorance of what is expedient leads to?
"But I too am rich." You are not, then, richer
than Agamemnon, are you ? " But I am also handsome."
You are not, then, handsomer than Achilles, are you? "But I have also a fine head of hair."
And did not Achilles have a finer, and golden hair,
too? And did he not comb it elegantly and dress it up? "But I am also strong." Y'ou are not, then,
able to lift as large a stone as Hector or Aias lifted, are you? "But I am also noble bom." Your
mother is not a goddess, is she, or your father of the
seed of Zeus ? What good, then, does all this do him
when he sits in tears about the damsel ? " But I am
an orator." And was not he? Do you not observe
how he has dealt with Odysseus and Phoenix, the
most skilful of the Greeks in eloquence, how he
stopped their mouths ? *
in the opinion of Epictetas, who had no nndae reverence for the great figures of the Epic.
* The reference is to the spirited and convincing speeches
of .'\chille8 {Hiad, IX.) in answer to the appeals of Odysseus
and Phoenix. 429
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
27 TavTa <roi fxova e^G) elirelv koI ovSe ravia
28 TrpoOvfico^.—Afa Tt ;
—
"On /le ovk rjpedi,aa<;. et? ri yap airiScDv epeOicrOco ^ cl)? ol IttttikoI irepl tou?
tTTTToy? T0U9 €V(f)vei<i ; el'i to (Tcofidriov ; ai(T-)(^poi<i avTO TrXd(raec<i. et9 rrjv eadrjra ; Koi ravTrjv
rpvcpepdv e')(ei<i. eU axVM^> ^^'"> /3A.e/x/ia ; et<? 29 ovhev. orav dfcovcrai 6€\t)<; <f)i\oa6(f>ov, firj Xeye
avrai on " ovhev fxoL Xeyei'i
;
" dWd puovov
BeLKvve cravTov olov t ^ aKovecv koI oyfrei, ttw?
Kivrja€i,<i Tov kijovTa.
K€ . n&)? dvajKoia to, XoyiKo,
;
1 Twy irapovTwv 8e nva eliroPTo^ Ueccrov fie, on TO, XoyiKO, ')(^pijcnfid ecrTtv, 0e\ef9, €(f)rj, 2 dTTohei^Q) aoi tovto ;—Nat.
—
Ovkovv Xoyov fi aTToheiKTiKov SiaXe^Orjvat Bet ;—'O/xoXoyi^cravTO^
3 ^6 Hodev ovv elar), dv ae (ro(pLa(Ofiai ;—l^iwirrj-
<TavTo<; Se tov dvOpcoTrov 'Opd<;, €(f)r}, ttw? avTO<;
opoXoyei'i oti TavTa dvayKuid iaTiv, el %a)pt9
avToov ouS' avTO tovto Svvacrai fiaOeiv, iroTepov
dvayKala 7] ovk dvayKotd €<ttiv.
Acr'. Tt TO tSiov TOV dfjuipT7]fiaT0<;
;
1 Yidv dp,dpT7]fia fid')(riv 7r€pi.e)(ei. eVet yap 6 d/xapTdvcov oil diXec d/xapTdveiv, dXXd KUTop1
Wolf : ipfdlva, S.
2 Schenkl : tov S. 430
BOOK II. XXIV 27-xxvi. I This is all I have to say to you, and even for this I have no heart.—Why so?—Because you have not
stimalated me. For what is there in you that I may
look at and be stimulated, as experts in horseflesh are stimulated when they see thoroughbred horses ? At
your paltry body ? But you make it ugly by the shape
which you give to it.^ At your clothes ? There is something too luxurious about them, also. At your
air, at your countenance ? I have nothing to look at. When you wish to hear a philosopher, do not ask him,
*'Have you nothing to say to me ? " but only show
yourself capable of hearing him, and you will see how you will stimulate the speaker.
CHAPTER XXV
How is logic necessary ?
When someone in his audience said, Convince me
that logic is necessary, he answered : Do you wish me
to demonstrate this to you .'' —Yes.—Well, then, must
I use a demonstrative argument?—And when the
questioner had agreed to that, Epictetus asked him.
How, then, will you know if I impose upon you ?
—
As the man had no answer to give, Epictetus said
:
Do you see how you yourself admit that all this
instruction is necessary, if, without it, you cannot so much as know whether it is necessary or not ? CHAPTER XXVI
What is the distinctive characteristic of error?
Every error involves a contradiction. For since he
who is in error does not wish to err, but to be right,
* That is, by pasture, overeating, or lack of exercise.
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
2 6o)aat, 8rj\ov on o fiev diXei ov Troiei, tL yap
6 KXeiTTT)^ deXet, Trpd^ac ; to uvtm o-vfi(pepov.
ovK ovv, et davficfiopov eariv avrw to K\eirTeiv,
3 fiev deXei Troiei. iraa-a he '^v')(r) Xoyi/cr) (pvaei
Bta^e^XrjTai irpos fid'x^rjV' /cal /J'expi' f^^v civ fxrj 'rrapaKoXovOfi tovtw, oti iv fidxu €<TTiv, ovSev
KO)\v€Tac TO, fxaxofieva iroielv irapaKoXovOrjaavTa
he TroWrj dvayxT} aTroaTrjvai t?79 /mux^V'* Kol (jyvyeiv ovtox; a>9 /cat dirb tov \jrev8ov<; dvaveiiaai
TTiKpd dvdyKrj tw aladavofievat, oti "^Ir€v86<; itTTiv fiexpt he TOVTO firj <f)avTd^rjTai, (u? dXrjdel
iircvevei avTa>.
4 Aeit-o? OVV ev X6ya>, o h avTO<; Kal irpoTpeTTTiKO<i
KoX eXeyiCTLKo^ OUT09 hvvdfievo^ eKacTTa)
irapahel^ai ttjv fjid^V^^^ /ea^' t]v dfiapTdvec, Kal
<Ta(j)(i)<i irapaaTTjaai, ttw? o deXei ov troiel Kal o jj,r) 5 deXei TTOtel. av yap tovto hei^rj tl^, avTo^i dcp'
avTov dvaTro^wprjaei,, I^^XP^ ^^ f^V hetKvvrj<i, fxrj davixa^e,ei iirifxever KaTopOcofiaTO^ ydp(f)avTaaLav
6 Xafi^dvcov iroiel avTO. hid tovto koI ^(OKpdTr)<i
TavTij TTj hvvd^iei TreTroidcb^ eXeyev otl " iyco
dXXov fxev ovheva etcoda Trapex^iv fidpTvpa Siv Xeyco, dpKOu/xcu 5' del t& itpocrh laXeyofievto Kal
CKclvov einylrrjipl^co Kal KaXoi /xdpTvpa Kal eU mv
7 ouTO? dpKcl fxoi dvTC TravTcoj/." rjhei ydp, vtto 432
BOOK II. XXVI. 1-7
it is clear that he is not doing what he wishes. For
what does the thief wish to achieve ? His own
interest. Therefore, if thievery is against his interest, he is not doing what he wishes. Now every
rational soul is by nature offended by contradiction ; and so, as long as a man does not understand that he
is involved in contradiction, there is nothing to prevent him from doing contradictory things, but
when he has come to understand the contradiction,
he must of necessity abandon and avoid it, just as a
bitter necessity compels a man to renounce the false when he perceives that it is false ; but as long as the
falsehood does not appear, he assents to it as the
truth.
He, then, who can show to each man the contradiction
which causes him to err, and can clearly
bring home to him how he is not doing what he
wishes, and is doing what he does not wish, is strong
in argument, and at the same time effective both in encouragement and refutation. For as soon as any- one shows a man this, he will of his own accord
abandon what he is doing. But so long as you do
not point this out, be not surjirised if he persists in
his error ; for he does it because he has an impression
that he is right. That is why Socrates, because he
trusted in this faculty, used to say : " I am not in the
habit of calling any other witness to what I say, but
I am always satisfied with my fellow-disputant, and
I call for iiis vote and summon him as a witness, and
he, though but a single person, is sufficient for me in place of all men."* For Socrates knew what moves
* Compare II. 12, 5, and the note on that passage.
* Supplied by Wolf.
453
ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS
TIV09 XoyiKT) >^v)(r) Kivetrai, o/jlolco^ ^ ^^y^ iirippeyfrei,^
av re 6e\r)<i av re fii]. XoyiKw rjye-
/jbOviKW Bel^ov ixd')(riv fcal aTroaTrjaeTai' av Be fx,r} BeiKvvrjf;, avTO<i aavTO) jj,dXX.ov iyKciXei rj t& fir) TrecOofievq).
* Added by Schweighauser.
* Schenkl: (irtdpe\pfi or iireidpiT^n S. Many conjectural
restorations have been proposed.
434
BOOK II. XXVI. 7 a rational soul, and that like the beam of a balance it will incline,! whether you wish or no. Point out to the rational governing faculty a contradiction and it will desist ; but if you do not point it out, blame
yourself rather than the man who will not be
persuaded.
• The text is very uncertain (see critical note). The
general idea, however, is pretty clearly that expressed by
Cicero, Acad. Pri. II. 38 ; Ut enim necesse est laneem in libra ponderibua impositis deprimi, sic animum perspicuia cedere.
435

INDEX
ABSCESSES, 89 Academics, 37, 39, 371 ff. Academy, 171, 175 Acceptably to the gods, things done,
99 £f. Achilles, 87, 143, 159, 183, 185, 415,
427, 429
Acropolis, the, 331
Activity, a duty of man, 75
Actor, 197, 199 Admetns, 395 Admiration, desire for, 141, 143 Admission of weaknesses, 383 fl. Adriatic, 253
Adultery, 233 fif., 279, 353
Advice, 231
Aeolus, 11 Agiunemnon, 143, 159, 185, 427, 429
Agrippinus, 15, 19
Aias, 275, 429
AJcibiades, 355 Alexander the Great, 305, 397 Alexander (Paris), 183, 361, 399
Allegiance, oath of, 105 Amphiaraus, 403 Amphitheatre, 163 Analvii; of svllogisms, 233
Anger, 99, 12'l ft., 167, 177 ff., 279, 353
Animals, for the service of man, 45, 109, 261 ; different from men, 43, 67 181 259 Another ('= God), 161, 205, 243
Antigonus, 301
Antipater, 349, 361, 363
Anti-social doctrines, 373, 376
AnUsthenes, 117, 347
Anxiety, 297 ff., 325 Anytus, 191, 229, 242, S43
Ape, 237
Applause, 297, 299
Application of preconceptions, 145,
285, 287, 339
Appropriate, the, 23, 179 Appropriation to one's own needs, 133 Arcbedemus, 237, 349, 363
Argumentation, art of, 291 ff. Arguments, 345. See also Equitocai
premisses ; Hypotfielical aryumenU
or tyllogitms ; SyUogisint.
Aricia, 15
Arrian, 5 Art of living, 107
Asclepius, 397
Ass, or donX-ev, 127, 131, 243, 261,
413, 427 Assayer of silver, 233
Assent, 31, 119, 121, 177, 341, 347 Athena, statue of, 263, 265, 367
Athenian, 63 f., 399
Athens, 163, 331, 333, 379
Athlete, 21, 31, 151, 195, 345. 347, 35?
Alreus, The, of Euripides, 187
Attica, 335
Augustus, priesthood of, 135
AnUiority, see Control. Avarice, 351, 353 Avengers, 375
Aversion, 11, 29, 31 Baby talk, 425
Balance, 185, 289, 435. See also
Criterion. BaDplay, 241,243
Banquet, 169, 333, 361, 363
Baptists, 273 Bath, 381, 383, 389 Baths of Nero, 331 Bato, 23 Beard, 23, 111, 413 Beheading, 11, 13, 19, 23, 127, 187, 193
Better, the, to prevail over the worse, 189
Bird-augur, 257
Birth, 63, 65, 97 Books, 31, 33, 405 ; cost of, 33
Boreas, 11 Boxers, 355
Briseis, 159
Brother, and brothers, 97, 99, 107; duty of, 277
Brit«8, 25 437
INDEX
Buffoon, 197 Bugbears, 217
Bull, a
Busklnp, 197, 199
Oaesar, 21, 25, 65, 75, 105, 133, 135, 197, 203, 253, 301, 303, 311, 365 Calm, 27, i 9 Calypso, 363
Capital punishment, abolition of, 123
Capitol, 59, 135
Carpenter, 307
Caution, 213 3., 229 Chains and fetters, 13, 127, 131, 187 Chamberlain, 133
Child and children, 79 ff., 95, 149, 151, 157, 195, 217, 329, 331, 333, 343, 395, 425
Choice, 11, 31, 35, 179,341
(Christians), 272, 273
Cbrysantas, 251
Chrvseis, 143 Chrvsippus, 29, 31, 35, 36, 77, 117, 119, 249, 333, 347, 349, 361, 363, 421
Ciconiaus, 363
Circumstances, 251
Cithaeron, 155
Oitharoede, 203, 297, 299, 323, 325
Citizen, duty of, 91, 275, 277, 417;
of universe, 63, 65, 275, 319
Cleanthes, 31, 117, 361, 363
Coinage, testing of, 139 Colophon, 311 Common property, 235, 237 Company of men, 95 Complex thing, a, 269 Compulsion, 119, 121
Confi lence, 213 ff., 229, 266, 267, 297
Conflict of opinions, 287
Consideration, 205
Contemplation, 203 Contentment, 89 ff. Contradictions, 371, 373, 433
Control, things under our control, and
not under our control, 7-13, 33, 49,
97, 99, 125, 145, 147, 157, 189, 217,
227, 239, 297, 299, 301, 369
Corinth, 333, 343
Corinthian, 63 f. Councillor, 277 Craftsman (= God), 265
Criterion, 17, 81, 83, 115, 287. See
Also Balance ; Uearure ; Standard.
Crito, 35
Croesus, 28
Cross, 229 Cupping glass, 339 Daemones, 243 Day and Night argument, 161 Death, 13, 15, 21, 87, 99, 173, 175,
217, 219, 239, 251, 255
Decisions of will, 87, 89, 121, 165 317,319
Deer, 215
Definitions, 341 Deiphobus, 361
Deity, the, 101. See also Divine, the ; Ood; Oods; Zeus. Demeter, 381 Demetrius, 163 Demosthenes, 421 Denarius, 139
Design, argument from, 41 f.. Ill, 315
Desire, 11, 27, 29, 31, 225, 377
Destiny, 419
Dice, 237, 239
Difficulties, 151 ff., 157 ff., 205 ff. Dio, the name, 93, 231, 303
Diodorus, 359, 361 Diogenes, the Babylonian, 363
Diogenes, the Cynic, 153, 231, 233
305, 333
Dioscuri, 357
Dirce, 331
Discrete thing, a, 269
Display of philosophy, 167 f., 361, 363
Divination, 119, 121,'255 ff. Divine, the, 89, 91, 261,377. See also Deity, the ; God ; Oods ; Zeus. Dog, 25, 395, 413 Domitian, 257
Door, the open, 157, 219 Drachma, 53, 233 Drowning, 241, 329 Duty, 179, 341, 347
Dysentery, 391 Earthquakes, 253, 329 Ecbatana, 333 Educated man and education, 17, 145, 171, 195, 199, 201, 207, 219, 221, 227, 345 Egoism. See Self-interest. Egyptians, 81, 143, 273, 287
Eloquence, 413, 415, 421 End, man's, 141, 205; The End, by
Epicurus, 411 Enth3Tneme, 59 Epaphroditus, 13, (73), 133, 169 438
INDEX
Bplctetus, 7, 9, 13, 19, 23, 25, 59, 63, 67, 69, 71, 72, 73, 75, 77, 113, 125, 127, 135, 169, 191, 253, 297, 349,
353, 361, 369, 371
Epicureans, 371 S. Epicnru=, 88, 141, 149, 151, 273, 367,
373, 375, 377, 399, 411, 413 Bquirocal premisses, 51 ff., 303, 305,
389, 419
Eriphvie, 403
Error,' nature of, 121 ff., 431 ft
Eteocles, 397
Euripides, 187, 331 Eury=theus, 335
Evil, 213. See also Good.
Exile, 13, 75, 87, 189 Expedient, the, 121 Exposure oi infants, 151 Expression, faculty of, 405 ff. External impressions. See Impretsions,
external. Externals, 107, 175, 227, 231, 239,
245, 325, 399
Bye-salves, 391
Failures, 32 7 Fair, 313, 315
Fallacv, 56
FaL^e, the, 433 Family affection, 79 fL Fates, 95 Father, duties of, 83, 85 Fatherhood of God, 63 fl., 99
Fear, 217, 327
Fearlessness, 219
Feeling, 120, 121
Felicio, 133, 135
Fetters. See Chain*. Fever, 131, 147, 241, 251, 353, 396
FideUtv, 233
Fields of study, 341, 343, 345, 347
Fighting cock, 229
First field of study, 341, 347
Flesh, 399, 411, 413 FUes, 151
Floras, 19 Food, views about, 81 Fool, 319
Foot, 245, 249, 275
Forgiving, 403, 403 Foundation, 317, 319 Fox, 27 Free and freedom, 91, 93, 95, 165, 219,
221, 227, 345 Freedom of choice, 30
Friendship, 391 ff. Furies, 375 Gain, 377 Game, 157, 159
Gellius, Lucius, 5 General principles, 337 Genius (a guardian spirit), 105 Getae, 399
Girls, 335
Gladiator, 197, 355, 429 God, 11, 25, 37, 41, 45, 65, 103, 111, 121, 141, 151, 187, 191, 195, 199, 205, 221, 241, 249, 257, 259, 261, 263, 265, 309, 313, 335, 337, 343, 355, 357, 367, 369, 40.5, 407, 413;
as father, 25 ; kinship to, 63 ff., 99
;
law of, 187, 189. See also Another. Gods, 11, 25, 89, 91, 93, 97, 141, 345. 397 Good, the, 141, 143, 145, 149, 157, 175, 187, 205, 213, 229, 239, 259, 261, 281, 321, 363; the good man.
303 Good and excellent man, 91, 275, 289 Governing principle or faculty, 107, 139, 169, 351, 357, 435 Governor of universe, 315
Grain, heads of, 249 Grain supply, 75 Grammar, 7-9, 137, 257, 269
Gratilla, 257
Gratitude, 37, 111, 113, 407 Great King (of Persia), 399
Greece, 399
Greeks, 273, 427, 429
Groaning, 127 Gyara, 163, 253 Gymnasium, 21, 329, 331 Habit, 173, 349, 351, 353, SS7 Hades, House of, 251 Hanging, 16, 17, 381. 411 Happiness, 29, 239 Harmony with Nature, 31, 33, 35, 79, 93, 95, 107, 145, 167; will in harmony with what happens, 307
Harvest, 249
Hector, 361, 429 Hecuba, 361 Helen, 363,415
Hellaijicus, 3C1, 363 HeUebore, 319
Hellenes, 183 Helmsman, 241 439
INDEX
tCelvidius Prlscus, 19, 21
Heracles, 47 f., 335, 355
Heraclitus, 229
Hesiod, 359
Hippocrates, 63, 339
Hippolytus, The, of Euripides, 187 Homer, 11, 91 Honourable, the, 399
Horse, 25, 431
Horse-race, 85 Hymn of praise, 113 Hypothetical arguments or srllo- gisms, 51 a., 161, 165, 169, 197, 199, 201
Ignorance, 425, 427
Iliad, The, 181
Ilium, 399
Impressions, external, 9, 137, 171,
179, 181, 349 ff., 355, 357, 361, 381, 391; use of, 9, 11, 27, 99, 137, 141, 205, 213, 269, 261, 311, 369, 407,
417, 419
Incompatible, the, 83
Inconsistency, 383 ff., 393
Incontinence, 385
Incubation, 327
Indifference in things, 247
Indifferent, things, 205, 271, 301, 3G3
Injury, 281
Inn, 155, 417, 419, 421 Innate concept, 283, 285
Insanity, 91 Interest, a man's. See Self-interest. Interpreter, 117
Introduction to Philosophy, 193
Invincible athlete, the, 127, 129
Involuntary, the, 385
Irrational, the, 15 ff. ; animals, 43, 67
Jealousy, 385
Jesus, saving of, 416
Jews, 81," 143, 273 (=» Christians). Judge, 247 Judgement, 131, 185, 187, 189, 217, 317, 319, 321 ff., 329, 333, 4U1, 403,
405, 407; suspended judgement,
121 Jumping-weights, 31, 391 Kings, 189 Kinship with gods, 63 ff., 97
Kore, 381 Lacedaemonians, 16, 399 440
Lamp, 125, 127, 191, 349
Lateranus, 13
Laticlave, 199. See also 7*0^0 praetexta
; Red stripe. Lawgivers, 221, 237 Law or laws of the gods, or God, 101,
187, 189, 191, 329; law of nature, 191 Lawyer, 299
Legislators, 379
Liar, The, a work by Ohryslppus, 346, 347; a sophism, 355, 389
Life, 247
Lion, 23, 27, 269
Listening, art or skill or practice in, 423
'Logic, need of, 51 ff., 59 ff., 113, 115,
117, 173, 431 Love, 385, 391, 393
Lycurgus, 379 Macedonians, 399 Madman, 187, 287, 317, 319 Madness, 91, 321 M.ognanimity, 237 ff. M;unmy, 331, 333, 335 Man, 203, 245, 423; different from
animals, 183, 261, 267, 275;
duties of, 276 ff. ; portion of God,
a, 261, 263; profession of, 267 ff. 273 ; social being, 149, 245, 275 ff. Marcian aqueduct, 330, 331
Marriage, 79, 417 Masks, 197, 199, 217
Master, 203; ''The Master" argu- ment, 353, 355, 358, 359, 361, 363
Materials, 243
Measure, 115, 377. See also Criterion Medea, 178, 179, 343
Meletus, 191, 229
Menelaus, 399
Milo, 25 MoJius, 115
Moesia, 161. See Addenda. Money, 323. See also Denarius, and Drachma.
Moral, purpose, or choice, 33, 91, 119,
121, 131, 333, 135, 187, 189, 193, 201, 213, 215, 217, 225, 239, 253, 277, 281, 282, 301, 315, 321, 399,
401, 407, 409, 411, 413, 415, 417 Mother, duties of, 83 Mouse (Mys), slave of Epicurus, 148, 149
Mules, 24S
INDEX
Mnsic.T, 9, 201,299, 307
Naso, 307, 310
Natural, the, 243
Nature, (incladiu^ man's nattire),
79, 81, 93, 101, 141, 147, 163, 167,
175, 191, 375; will of, 117, 119. See also HarTttony tcith A'aiure. Necklace, 403
Nero, 13, 19, 163 ; baths of, 331 Newman, Cardinal, 418
Nicopolis, 70, 137, 163, 169, 253, 389
Nike, 265
Nose, running, how to treat it, 47, 325
Nurse, 83, 331 Obedience, 251
Obstinacy, 315 ff. Odysseus, 91, 429
Odyssey, The, 181 Oedipus, 35, 157
Oedipus, The, of Sophocles, 187
OCEeaces against societv, 385 Olympia, 45 47, 127, 197
Oljrmpic games, 21, 151, 355
Opinion, 87, 121, 123, 253, 271, 287
Orator, 323
Orestes, 375 Owe, oae's, 155, 157, 159, 249, 329 Oi, 413 Paean, 253
Pancratiasts, 355
Panthoides, 361 Pantrr, 271
Parente, 95, 97, 167
Particular instances. See Applicalion
of preconceptions. Patroclus, 87, 185
Peace, 95 Peace of mind, 239, 337
Peevishness, 95
Pelf, 279, 281
Perception, 175
Peripatetics, 367
Peroration, 229
Petrifaction of intellect, 39
Pheidias, 45, 263, 367
Philip, 305
Philosopher and philoe^ophers, 13, 21,
23, 27, 63, 73, 75, 77, 85, 121, 139,
149, 165, 167, 189, 193, 213, 221,
223, 267 £f., 271, 273, 275, 281, 303.
307, 309, 313, 315, 333, 337, 347, 351,377,379,387,423,431
Philosophy, 107, 149, 169, 283, 309, 425 Phoenii, 429
Phoenix, The, at Euripides (of Sophocles), 187
Physical trainer, 151
PhVr^ician, 63, 301, 313, 319, 339
Physics, The, by Epicurus, 411
Piety, 377, 379
Pity, 123, 179, 385
Plato, 63, 179, 339, 341, 347, 353, 405
Pleasure, 289
Pluto, 381
PoUtics, 131
Polyneices, 397
Poseidonius, 65
Poultices, 391
Practice, 221, 321 ff., 327, 329
Praefectus annonae, 75
Praetor, 221
Praise, 323, 325. See also Applause.
Prai.se, hymn of, 113
Preconceptions, 143 ff., 173, 185, 283, 285, 337, 339, 341 Priam, 33, 361, 363 Primary importance, being of, 261 , 275
Principal faculty, 141
Principles, philosophic, 389, 391
Prison, 95, 187, 193, 253
Procrustes, 335
Profession, various kinds of, 267
Profitable, the, 179
Progress, 27 ff., 283
Providence, 41 fL, 101, 109, 309
Pyrrho, 171, 175 Pythian priestess, 379
Quibbles, 201
Quiescent, The, Zoo
Bational, the, 15 ff., 433, 435 ; animal (~ man), 43 Reasoning, art of, 113 Q. Keason, or the reasoning faculty, 9, 25, 59 ff., 97, 137 ff., 193 Becommendation, 231, 233 Red stripe in toga praetexta, 19, 21, 155
Refusal, 11.31
Religion, origin of, 379
Renunciation, 155, 163, 329, 331, 343
Responsibility for self, 73, 87, 119,
180, 181, 183, 187, 3u3, 343
Reticence, 195, 203
Reviling, 165 Revolution of universe, 219 441
INDEX
Rhetoric, 421 Rhodes, 229 Robe, the long, of tragic actors, 197, 199 Romans, 81, 143, 399 Rome, 13, 65, 71, 73, 75, 85, 87, 131, 153, 163, 169, 197, 253, 295 Rufus (Musonius RuJfus), 13, 59, 73 Ruleof life, 105 Runner, 33
Salutation, 249
Sanctity, 377, 379
Sarpedon, 173
Saturnalia, 159, 195
Scholar, caught in adultery, 233 S. School atterdant, 83, 85 School exercises, 75, 77, 169, 207, 221, 223, 253, 283, 303, 307, 321, 327,
331, 333, 345, 347, 387, 389
School, frequenter of, 89
Sciron, 335
Scourging, 15, 17
Scout, of philosophy, 153 Second field of study, 341, 345
Self-examination, 387
Self-interest, 131, 133, 147, 175, 397,
399, 401, 403
Self-love, 133
Self-respect, 27, 279, 281, 379, 403
Senate, 15, 19, 21
Senators, 163, 165 Sense impressions, 179, 181, 186, 187
Senses, evidence of, 177
Serenity, 27 Sheep, 151, 269, 425 Shoemaker, 307
Sick mind, 321
Sirens, 419
Slave and slavery, 67, 99, 131, 203,
221, 227, 381, 385, 413 Smith, 279 Smoke in the house, 161, 163
Snake, 163
Social relations, 309
Socrates, 23, 25, 35, 63 f., 71, 91, 95, 117, 131, 165, 171, 191, 195, 203, 205, 217, 223, 227, 229, 237, 243, 253, 291, 293, 305, 333, 355, 433
Soldiers, 105, 109
Son, duty of, 95, 277
Sophisms, 171
Sophocles, 187 Sorrow, 333
Soul, 103, 295, 297 443
Sparta, 379
Speech, 409 ; art of speaking, 421 Sponges, 85 Standard, The, by Epicurus, 411 Standard of judgement, 115, 185, 287
289, 303, 377. See also Criterion. Starving, 317, 411
State, of men and of gods, 245;
small copy of universal state, 245
Steadfastness, 187 ff., 237, 239, 315 ff. Stoics, 201, 273, 291, 365, 367, 376
Storks'nests, 181, 183 Strength of character, 39
Stupidity, 285
Style, 417, 419
Suicide, 15, 17, 67 f., 157, 163, 219, 317,381,411
Sun, 103, 133
Surgery, 165
Susa, 3"33 Swallows' nests, 181
Swine's flesh, 143
Syllocrisms, 51 ff., 61, 149, 195, 197,
199, 201, 225, 233, 247, 303, 345, 389,391,419, 421 Sympathy in Nature, 101, 103 Symposium, The, of Xenophon, 295
Syrians, 81, 143, 273, 287 Tax for manumission of slave, 221
Teaching, skill in, 291, 293, 295
Technique, instruction in, 307 Theo, the name, 231 Theopompus, 339 Thermopylae, 379
Thersites, 415
Theseus, 335
Thief, 125, 127, 191, 433 Things Possible, works by Chrysippus and by Antipater, 363 Third field of study, 341, (347) Thrasea, 13 Three campaigns, the, 310, 311
Timidity, 385 Tragedv, 35, 155, 187, 331 Tragic actor, 197, 199, 203
Tragic r61e, 155, 199
Tranquillity, 219, 223, 225
Transitoriness of life, 241
Traveller, 417, 419
Tribuneship, 136
Triptolemus, 35
Troians, 427 Troian shore, 363
Troy, 183
INDEX
Trnth, •iin Tumours, 79, 89 Tyrant, 99, 127, 129 B., 187, 221, 251
;
The Thirty Tyrants, 305
Ulcers, 391 Uneducated, the, 61 B. Unirerse, 103, 315; revolution of, 219 Unnatural lust, 279
Vespasian, 19, 21
Vice, 365
Vine, 425
Vinegar, 291
Virtue and Virtues, 29, 31, 271
Vision, facidty of, 81, 97, 405, 407
Voice-trainer, 33 Voyage, 239 Wars, 181 Wasps, 235 WeaTer, 243
Wheel (- rack), 251 Wild beasts, 269, 279
Will, 92, 95, 121, 147, 307 Witness for God, 199; to arguments
by acts, 201
Wolf, 27, 151, 237 Wool, 243 Women common property, 235, 237
Wrestling school, 23
Xenophon, 117, 295, 347
Zeno, 31, 117, 139, 141, 301 ZephjTus, 11 Zens, 9, 13, 25, 49, 95, 99, 105, 131, 133, 147, 157, 159, 173, 263, 267,
343, 345, 369, 419, 429; Father of men and of gods, 133 ; PVuit-giver, 133, 147; Rain-bringer, 133, 147;
Saviour, 147; statue at Olyinpia,
45, 263, 367
443
Printed in Great Britain by
Richard Clay and Company, Ltd., Bungay, Suffolk
THE LOEB CLASSICAL
LIBRARY
VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED
Latin Authors
Ammianus Marcellinus Translated by J. C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. C2nd Imp. revised.) AfcXlEICS : The Golden Ass (Metamorphoses). W. Adling- ton (1566). Revised by S. Gaselee. {1th Imp.)
St. Augustine, Confessions of. W. Watts (1631). 2 Vola
(Vol. I. ~th Imp., Vol. II. 6th Imp.)
St. Augustine, Select Letters. J. H. Baxter. {2nd Imp.)
AusONics. H. G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols. {2nd Imp.)
Bede. J. E. King. 2 Vols. {2nd Imp.)
Boethius : Tracts and De Consolatione Philosophiak.
Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. Rand. {6th Imp.)
Caesar : Alexandrian, African find Spanish Wars. A. G. Way.
Caesar: Civil Wars. A. G. Peskett. {5th Imp.)
Caesar: Gallic War. H. J. Edwards. {lOth Imp.)
Cato : De Re Rustica ; Varro : De Re Rustica. H. B. Ash
and W. D. Hooper. (3rd Imp.)
Catullus. F. W. Cornish ; Tibullus. J . B. Postgate ; Pervigilium
Veneris. J. W. Mackail. {I3th Imp.)
Celsus : De Medicina. W. G. Spencer. 3 Vols. (VoL 1. 3rd Imp. revised. Vols. II. and III. 2nd Imp.)
Cicero : Brutus, and Orator. G. L. Hendrickson and H. M.
Hubbell. (3rd Imp.)
[Cicero] : Ad Herennium. H. Caplan.
Cicero : De Fato ; Paradoxa Stoicorum ; De Partitionk
Oratoria. H. Rackham (With De Oratore, Vol. II.) {2nd Imp.)
Cicero : De Finibus. H. Rackham. {4th Imp. revised.) Cicero : De Inventions, etc. H. M. HubbelL
Cicero : De Natuba Deorum and Academjca. H. Rackham.
(2nd Imp.)
CiCEBO : De OrFicns. Walter Miller. {Ith Imp.)
Cicero : De Oratore. 2 Vols. E. VV. Sutton and H. Rackham.
{2nd Imp.)
Cicero : De Republica and De Leoibus Clinton W. Keyes.
(4th Imp.)
Cicero : De Se.nectute, De Amicitia, Db Divinatione.
W. A. Falconer. (6/A Imp.)
Cicero : In Catilinam, Pro Flacco, Pbo Mubena, Pec Sulla.
Louis E. Lord. (3rd Imp. retrised.) Cicero : Letters to Atticus. E. O. Winstedt. 3 Vols.
(Vol. I. nth Imp., Vols. II. and III. ith Imp.)
1
CiCBBO : Letters to His Friends. W. Glynn Williams. 3 Vols. (Vols. I. and II. 3rd Imp., Vol. III. 2nd Imp. revised.) Cicero : Philippics. W. C. A. Ker. (3rd Imp. revised.) Cicero : Pro Archia, Post Reditum, De Domo, De HaruspicuM
Responsis, Pro Plancio. N. H. Watts, {ith Imp.)
Cicero : Pro Caecina, Pro Lege Manilia. Pro Cluentio,
Pro Rabirio. H. Grose Hodge. (3rd Imp.)
Cicero : Pro Milone, In Pisonem, Fro Scauro, Pro Fonteio,
Pro Rabirio Postumo. Pro Marcello, Pro Ligario, Pro
Reqe Deiotaro. N. H. Watts. (2nd Imp.)
Cicero : Pro Quinctio, Pro Roscio Amerino, Pro Roscio
Comoedo, Contra Rullum. J. H. Freese. (3rd Imp.)
Cicero : Tusculan Disputations. J. E. King. (4</i Imp.)
Cicero : Verrine Orations. L. H. G. Greenwood. 2 Vols.
(Vol. 1. 3rd Imp., Vol. IT. 2nd Imp.)
Claudian. M. Platnauer. 2 Vols. (2nd Imp.)
Columella : De Re Rustica, De Arboribus. H. B. Ash,
E. S. Forster and E. Heffner. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Imp.)
Ctjbtius, Q. History of Alexander. J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. (2nd Imp.)
Florus. E. S. Forster and Cornelius Nepos. J C. Rolfe. (2nd Imp.)
Frontinus : Stratagems and Aqueducts. C. E. Bennett and
M. B. McElwain. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp., Vol. II 2nd Imp.)
Fronto : Correspondence. C. R. Haines. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp. Vol. II. 2nd Imp.) Gellius. J. C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp.. Vols. 11. and
III. 2nd Imp.)
Horace : Odes and Epodes. C. E. Bennett. (I4<A Imp.
revised.) Horace : Satires, Epistles, Ars Poetica. H. R. Fairclough.
{9lh Imp. revised.) Jerome: Selected Letters. F. A. Wright. (2nd Imp.)
Juvenal and Persius. G. G. Ramsay. (Ith Imp.)
LiVY. B. O. Foster, F. Q. Moore, Evan T. Sage, and A. C. Schlesinger. 14 Vols. Vols. l.-XIII. (Vol. I. ith Imp.
Vols. II., III., v., and IX. 3rd Imp. ; Vols. IV.. VI.-VIII. X.-XII. 2nd Imp. revised.) LucAN. J. D. Duff. (3rd Imp.)
Lucretius. W. H. D. Rouse. (1th Imp. revised.) Martial. W. C. A. Ker. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 5th Imp., Vol. II 4th Imp. revised.) MmoR Latin Poets : from Publilius Syrus to Rutilius
Namatianus, including Grattius, Calpurnius Siculus,
Nemesianus, Avianus, and others with " Aetna " and the
" Phoenix." J. Wight Duff and Arnold M. Duff. (3rd Imp.)
Ovid : The Art op Love and Other Poems. J. H. Mozley.
(3rd Imp.)
Ovid: Fasti. Sir James G. Frazer. (2nd Imp.)
Ovid : Heroides and Amobes. Grant Showerman. (5th Imp.)
Ovid : Metamorphoses. F. J. Miller 2 Vols. (Vol. I. lOth Imp.. Vol. II. 8th Imp.,
Ovid : Tbistia and Ex Ponto. A. L. Wheeler. (3rd Imp.) Pkbsius. Cf. Juvenal.
Petkokius. M. Heseltine; Seneca Apocolocyntosis.
W. H. D. Rouse. {9th Imp. revised.) Plactcs. Paul Xixon. 5 Vols. (Vol. I. 6*A Imp., U. 5th Imp.,
III. 3rd Imp., IV. and V. 2nd Imp.)
Puny : Letters. Melmoth's Translation revised by W. M. L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. I6th Imp.)
Puny : Natckal History. H. Rackham and W. H. S. Jones.
10 Vols. Vols. I. -V. and IX. H. Rackham. Vols. VI. and VII. W. H. S. Jones. (Vols. l.-IIl. 3rd Imp., Vol. IV. ind Imp.)
Peopebtius. H. E. Butler. (6th Imp.)
Pbuden-tics. H. J. Thomson. 2 Vols. QuiNTiLiAN. H. E. Butler. 4 Vols. (3rd Imp.)
Remains of Old Latin. E. H. Warmington. 4 Vols. Vol. L
(ExNius AND Caecilius.) Vol. n. (Livius, Naevius,
Pacuvics, Accius.) Vol. III. (LuctLixjs and Laws of XII
Tables.) Vol. IV. (2nd Imp.) (Archaic Inscriptions.) Sallust. J. C. Rolfe. (ith Imp. revised.) ScBiPTOHES Historiae Acgcstae. D. Magie. 3 Vols. (Vol. i. 3rd Imp. revised. Vols. II. and III. 2nd Imp.)
Seneca : Apocolocyntosis. Cf. Petronitjs.
Seneca : Epistulae Morales. R. M. Gummere. 3 Vols.
(Vol. I. ith Imp., Vols. II. and III. 2nd Imp.)
Seneca: Moral Essays. J. W. Basore. 3 Vols. (VoL IL
3rd Imp., Vols. I. and III. 2Md Imp. revised.) Seneca : Tragedies. F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 4<A Imp.,
Vol. II. 3rd Imp. revised.) SiDONiTJS : Poems and Lettebs. W. B. Anderson. 2 Vela
(Vol. I. 2nd Imp.)
SrULS Italicus. J. D. Diifi. 2 Vols. (VoL 1. 2nd Imp.,
Vol. II. 3rd Imp.)
Statius. J. H. Mozley. 2 Vols, (2nd Imp.)
Suetonius. J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 1th Imp., VoL IL
6th Imp. revised.) Tacitus : Dialogus. Sir Wm. Peterson. Agbicola and
Gebmania. Maurice Hutton. (6th Imp.)
Tacitus : Histories and Annals. C. H. Moore and J. Jackson.
4 Vols. (Vols. I. and II. ith Imp., Vols. III. and IV
3rd Imp.) Terence. John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (1th Imp.,
Tebtuixian : Apologia and De Spectaculis. T. R. Glover. MiNUCius Felix. G. H. Rendall. (2nd Imp.)
Valebius Flaccus. J. H. Mozley. (2nd Imp. revised.) Vabbo : De Lingua Latina. R. G. Kent. 2 Vols. (2nd Imp.
revised.) Vkixeius Patebculus and Res Gestae Divi Augcstl F. W.
Shipley. (2nd Imp.)
ViBOiL. H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. (VoL I. I9th Imp., VoL n.
lith Imp. revised.) ViTBuvius : De Abchitectuba. F. Granger. 2 Vols. (VoL 1. 3rd Imp., VoL II. 2nd Imp.)
Greek Authors
Achilles Tatids. S. Gaselee. (2nd Imp.)
Aeneas Tacticus, Asclepiodotus and Onasandee. The
Illinois Greek Club. {2nd Imp.)
Aeschines. C. D. Adams. (2nd Imp.)
Aeschylus. H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols. {Qth Imp.)
Alciphron, Aelian, Philostratus Letters A. R. Benner and F. H. Fobes. Andocides, Antiphon. Of. Minor Attic Orators. Apollodorus. Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols. (Vol. 1. 3rd Imp., Vol. 11. 2nd Imp.)
Apollonius Rhodius. R. C. Seaton. {5lh Imp.)
The Apostolic Fathers. Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols. (VoL 1. 8th Imp., Vol. II. 6th Imp.)
Appian : Roman History. Horace White. 4 Vols. (VoL I. iih Imp., Vols. 11. and IV. 3rd Imp., Vol. III. 2nd Imp.) Aratus. Cf. Callimachus.
Aristophanes. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. Verse
trans. {5th Imp.)
Aristotle: Art of Rhetoric. J. H. Freese. (3rd Im,p.)
Aristotle : Athenian Constitution, Eudemian Ethics,
Vices and Virtues. H. Rackham. (3rd Imp.)
Aristotle : Generation of Animals. A. L. Peck. (2nd Imp.i
Aristotle : Metaphysics. H. Tredennick. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. ith Imp., II. 3rd Im,p.)
Aristotle : Meteorolooica. H. D. P. Lee. Aristotle : Minor Works. W. S. Hett. On Colours, On
Things Heard, On Physiognomies, On Plants, On Marvellous Things Heard, Mechanical Problems, On Indivisible Lines. On Situations and Names of Winds, On Melissus, Xenophanes.
and Gorgias. (2nd Imp.)
Aristotle : Nicomachean Ethics H. Rackham. i6/A Imp
revised.) Aristotle : Oeconomica and Magna Moralia. G C. Armstrong;
(with Metaphysics, Vol. II.). (3rd Im,p.)
Aristotle • On the Heavens. W. K. C. Guthrie. (3rd Imp
revised.) Aristotle : On Sophistical Refutations, On Coming to be and
Passing Away, On the Cosmos. E. S. Forster and D. J. Furley.
Aristotle : On the Soul, Parva Naturalia, On Breath.
W. S. Hett. (2nd Imp. revised.) Aristotle : Orqanon. Categories : On Interpretation, Prior Analytics. H. P. Cooke and H. Tredennick. (3rd Imp.)
Aristotle : Parts of Animals. A. L. Peck ; Motion and
Progression of Animals. E. S. Forster. (3rd Imp. revised.) Aristotle: Physics. Rev P. Wicksteed and F M. Comford.
2 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Zmp., Vol. II. 3rd /wp.)
Aristotle : Poetics and Longinus. W. Hamilton Fyfe;
Demetrius on Style. W. Rhys Roberts. {5th Imp. revised.) Aristotle : Politics. H. Rackham. {^th Imp. revised.) Aristotle: Problems. W.S. Hett. 2 Vols. {2nd Imp. revised.) 4
AmufixyruB : Rhktokica Ad Alkxakdbum (with Pkobubics.
Vol. n.). H. Rackham.
Arriak : History of Alexaxdeb and Ixdica. Rev. E. Iliffe Robson. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp., Vol. II. 2nd Imp.)
Athenaeus : Dkipnosophista^. C. B. Gulick- 7 Vols
(Vols. I.. IV.-Vn. 2nd Imp.)
9t. Bash. : Letters. R. J. Deferrari. 4 Vols. (2nd Imp.)
Caixtmachtts, Hymns and Epigrams, and Lycophbon. A. W.
Mair: Aratus. G. R. Mair. (2nd Imp.)
Clement ot Axexandria. Rev. G. \V. Butterworth. (3rd Imp.) COIXCTHTS. Cf. OpPIAH
Daphxis and Chloe. Thomley's Translation re\'ised by
J. M. Edmonds : and PARTHE>rrcs. S. Gaaelee. (Ath Imp.)
Demostheves I : Olynthiacs. Phiuppics and MrsoR Oba
TIONS. I -XVII. AND XX. J. H. Vince. {2nd Imp.)
Demosthenes II Dk Corona and Db Falsa Leoatione.
C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince. {3rd Imp. revised.) Demosthenes HI : Meedias, Andbotion, Aristocrates. Temocrates and Aristooetton, t and II. J H. Vince. (2nd Imp.
)
Demosthenes IV-Vl : Private Orations and In Xeaeram.
A. T. Murray. (Vol. IV. 2nd Imp.
)
Demosthenes Vn : Funeral Speech, Erotic Essay, Exordia
and Letters. S. W. and N. J. DeWi-.t. Dio Cassius : Roman History. E. Cary. 9 Vols. Vols. 1. and II. 3rd Imp., Vols. III.-IX. 2nd Imp.)
Dio Chbysostom. J. W. Cohoon and H. Lamar Crosby. 3 Vols. Vols. I.-IV. 2nd Imp.)
Oiodorus Sicctlus. 12 Vols Vols. l.-VI. C. H. Oldfather. VoL VU. C. L. Sherman Vols. IX. and X. R. M. Geer.
(Vols I.-IV. 2nd Imp.)
Uiooenes Laertius. R. D. Hicks. 2 Vols. (VoL l. «A Imp.
Vol. U. 3rd Imp.)
DiONYSics OT Halicarnassus : Roman ANrxQcmES. Spel
man's translation revised by E. Cary 7 Vols (Vols. l.-V 2nd Imp.)
EpiCTETTjs. W. A. Oldfather. 2 Vols. (Vol. 1. 3rd /mp, 11. 2nd
Imp.)
Kcripides. a. S. Wav. 4 Vols. (Vols. 1. and 11 1th Imp.
Ill and IV. &ih Imp.i Verse trans. Eusebics : Ecclesiastical History. Kirsopp Lake and
J. E. L. Oulton. 2 Vols. (Vol. 1. 3rd Imp., Vol. n. \th Imp.)
Gai,en : On the Natural Faculties. A. J. Brock. (4<A Imp. • The Greek Anthology. W. R. Paton. 5 Vols. (Vols. I. and n. 5th Imp.. Vol. III. ith Imp., Vols. IV. and V. 3rd Imp.)
ijREEK Elegy and Iambus with the Anacreontea. J. M. Edmonda 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Imp.. Vol. II. 2nd Imp.)
Fhe Orezk Bucolio Poets (Theocritus, Bion, Moschus).
J. M. Edmonds. (1th Imp. revised.) Gbeee Mathematical Works. Ivor Thomas. 2 Vols. (2nd
Imp.)
HERODXS Ct. THXOFH&A8XUS : CBASACTXRS
HERODOTU8. A. D. Godley. 4 Vols. (Vols. I.-III. 4th Imp.,
Vol. IV. 3rd Imp.)
Hesiod and The Homeric Hymns. H. G. Evelyn White.
{Tth Imp. revised and enlarged.)
HiPPOCKATES and the Fragments of Heracleitus. W. H. S. Jones and E. T. Withington. 4 Vols. (3rd Imp.)
Homer : Iliad. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 1th Imp.,
Vol. II. &th Imp. ) Homer : Odyssey. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. (8th Imp.)
IsAEUs. E. W. Forster. {3rd Imp.)
IsocRATES. George Norlin and LaRue Van Hook. 3 Vols. (2nd
Imp.)
St. John Damascene : Barlaam and Ioasaph. Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. (3rd Imp. revised.) JosEPHUS. H. St. J. Thackeray and Ralph Marcus. 9 Vols. Vols. I.-VII. (Vol. V. 3rd Imp., Vols. I.-IV., VI. and \U.
2nd Imp.) Julian. Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. (Vols. 1. and II. 3rd Imp., Vol. III. 2nd Imp.)
LuciAN. A. M. Harmon. 8 Vols. Vols. l.-V. (Vols. I. and
II. 4th Imp., Vol. III. 3rd Imp., Vols. IV. and V. 2nd Imp.)
Lycophron. Cf. Callimachus.
Lyra Graeca. J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 4th Imp.
Vol. II. revised and enlarged, and III. 3rd Imp.)
Lysias. W. R. M. Lamb. (2nd Imp.)
Manetho. W. G. Waddell : Ptolemy ; Tetbabiblos. F. E. Robbins. (3rd Imp.)
Marcus Aurelius. C. R. Haines. (4th Imp. revised.) Menander. F. G. Allinson. (3rd Imp. revised.) Minor Attic Orators (Antiphon, Andocides, Lycurgus,
Demades, Dinarchus, Hypereides). K. J. Maidment and
J. O. Burrt. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Imp.)
Nonnos : DiONYSiACA. W. H. D. Rouse. 3 Vols. (2nd Imp.)
Oppian, Colluthus, Tryphiodobus. a. W. Mair. (2nd Imp.)
Papyri. Non-Literary Selections. A. S. Hunt and C. C. Edgar. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Imp.) Literary Selections.
Vol. I. (Poetry). D. L. Page. (3rd Imp.)
Parthenius. Cf. Daphnis and Chloe.
Pausanias : Description of Greece. W. H. S. Jones. 5
Vols.- and Companion Vol. arranged by R. E. Wycherley.
(Vols. I. and III. 3rd Imp., Vols. II., IV. and V. 2nd Imp.)
Philo. 10 Vols. Vols. I.-V. ; F. H. Colson and Rev. G. H. Whitaker. Vols. VI.-IX. ; F. H. Colson. (Vols. IL-HI.
V.-IX. 2nd Imp., Vols. I. and IV., 3rd Imp.)
Philo : two supplementary Vols. (Translation only.) Ralph
Marcus. Philostratus : The Life of Appollonius of Tyana. F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 4th Imp., Vol. II. 3rd Imp.)
Philostratus : Imagines ; Callistratus : Descriptions.
A. Fairbanks. Philostratus and Eunapius : Lives of the Sophists.
Wilmer Cave Wright. (2nd Imp.)
Ptndab. Sir J. E. Sandys. (1th Imp. revised.) Plato : CHAasiiDEs, Alcibiades, Hipparchus, The Lovebs,
Theages. Minos and Epinomis. W. R. M. Lamb. (2nd
Imp.)
Pulto : Cratylus, Parmenides, Greater Hippias, Lesser
HippiAS. H. N. Fowler. (4^ Imp.)
F'liATO : EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CrITO, PhaEDO, PhAEDRUS.
H. X. Fowler, {llth Imp.)
Plato : Laches, Protagoras, Meno, Euthydemtjs. W. R. M. Lamb. (3rd Imp. revised.) P1.AT0 : Laws. Rev. R. G. Bury. 2 Vols. (3rd Imp.)
Plato : Lysis, Symposittm. Goroias. W. R. M. Lamb. (Sth Imp. revised.) Plato : Republic. Paul Shorey. 2 Vols (VoL L 5th Imp.,
Vol. II. ith Imp.)
Plato : Statesman, Philebus. H. N. Fowler ; Ion. W. R. M. Lamb, (ith Imp.)
Plato : Theaetetus and Sophist. H. N. Fowler. (4th Imp.)
Plato : Timaeus, Critias, Clitopho, Menexentjs, Episttilab. Rev. R. G. Bury. (3rd Imp.)
Plutarch: Moralia. U Vols. Vols. l.-V. F. C. Babbitt;
Vol. VI. VV. C. Helmbold; Vol. X. H. N. Fowler. (Vols. I.-VI. and X. 2nd Imp.)
Plutarch : The Parallel Lives. B. Perrin. 11 Vols.
(Vols. I., II.. VI., VII., and XI 3rd Imp. Vols. IIL-V. and
VTII.-X. 2nd Imp.) PoLYBius. W. R. Paton. 6 Vols. (2nd Imp. ) Pbocopius : History of the Wars. H. B. Dewing. 7 Vols.
(Vol. I. 3rd Imp., Vols. II.-VII. 2nd Imp.)
Ptolemy : Tetrabiblos. Cf. Manetho.
QuiNTUs Smyrnaeus. a. S. Way. Verse trans. (3rd Imp.)
Sextus Empiricus. Rev. R. G. Bury. 4 Vols. (Vol. I. 3fd Imp., Vols. II. and III. 2nd Imp.)
Sophocles. F. Storr 2 Vols. (Vol. I. lOth Imp Vol. II. 6th Imp. ) Verse trans. Stbabo : Geography. Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols. (Vols. L, V„
and VIII. 3rd Imp.. Vols. II., IH., IV., VI., and VII. 2nd Imp.) Theophrastcs : Characters. J. M. EMmonds. Herodes,
etc. A. D. Knox. (3rd Imp.)
Theopbrastus : ENQtnRY INTO Plants. Sir Arthur Hort,
Bart. 2 Vols. (2nd Imp.)
Thucydides. C. F. Smith. 4 Vols. (Vol. I. 5th Imp.. Vols.
II.. III., and IV. 3rd Imp. revised.) Tbyphiodorcs. Cf. Oppian.
Xenophon : Cybopaedia. Walter Miller. "J Vols. (VoL I. 4^
Imp.. Vol. II. 3rd Imp.)
Xenophon : Hellenica, Anabasis, Apology, and Symposium.
C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd 3 Vola (Vols. I and IIL
3rd Imp., Vol. II. ith Imp.)
Xenophon : Memorabilia and Oeconomicus. E. C. Marchant.
(3rd Imp.)
Xenophon • Scbipta Minora. E. C. Matvbant. (3rd Imp.)
I
IN PREPARATION
Greek Authors
Aelian : On the Nature of Animals. A. F. Scholfield. Abistotle : History of Animals. A. L. Peck. Callimachus : Fragments. C. A. Trypanis.
Plotinus : A. H. Armstrong.
Latin Authors
St. Augustine : City of God.
Cicero : Pro Sestio, In Vatenium. J . H. Freese and R. Gardner. CicERO: Pro Caelio, De Provinciis Consularibus, Pro
Balbo. J. H. Freese and R. Gardner. Phaedbus. Ben E. Perry.
DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS OIS APPLICATION
London WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
Cambridge, Mass. HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS


PA
3612
V.I
.^.itctus
Discourses

On the Shortness of Life

LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA
TRANSLATED BY GARETH D. WILLIAMS



(i.i) Most of mankind, Paulinus, complains about natures meanness,
because our allotted span of life is so short, and because this stretch
of time that is given to us runs its course so quickly, so rapidly — so
much so that, with very few exceptions, life leaves the rest of us in
the lurch just when we re getting ready to live. And its not just the
masses and the unthinking crowd that complain at what they per-
ceive as this universal evil; the same feeling draws complaints even
from men of distinction. Hence that famous dictum of the greatest
of physicians: "Life is short, art long." 1 (2) Hence also Aristotle's
grievance, 2 most unbecoming a philosopher, when he called nature
to account for bestowing so much time on animals that they can live
for five or ten human life spans, while so much shorter a limit is set
for humans, even though they are born to do so many great things.

(3) It's not that we have a short time to live, but that we waste
much of it. Life is long enough, and it's been given to us in generous
measure for accomplishing the greatest things, if the whole of it is
well invested. But when life is squandered through soft and careless
living, and when it's spent on no worthwhile pursuit, death finally
presses and we realize that the life which we didn't notice passing
has passed away. (4) So it is: the life we are given isn't short but we
make it so; we're not ill provided but we are wasteful of life. Just as
impressive and princely wealth is squandered in an instant when it
passes into the hands of a poor manager, but wealth however modest
grows through careful deployment if it is entrusted to a responsible
guardian, just so our lifetime offers ample scope to the person who
maps it out well.

(2.1) Why do we complain about nature? It has acted generously:
life, if you know how to use it, is long. But one person's held in the
grip of voracious avarice, another by the kind of diligence that bus-
ies itself with pointless enterprises. This one's sodden with wine,
another slack with idleness. This one's tired out by his political ambi-
tion, which always hangs on the judgment of others, while another's
passionate desire for trading drives him headlong over every land



and every sea in hope of profit. A passion for soldiering torments
some men, who are always either bent on inflicting dangers on oth-
ers or worried about danger to themselves. Some are worn down
by the voluntary enslavement of thankless attendance on the great.
(2) Many are kept busy either striving after other people's wealth or
complaining about their own. Many who have no consistent goal in
life are thrown from one new design to another by a fickleness that is
shifting, never settled and ever dissatisfied with itself. Some have no
goal at all toward which to steer their course, but death takes them
by surprise as they gape and yawn. I cannot therefore doubt the truth
of that seemingly oracular utterance of the greatest of poets: "Scant
is the part of life in which we live." 3 All the rest of existence is not
living but merely time.

(3) Vices assail and surround us on all sides, and they don't allow
us to rise again and lift our eyes to the clear discernment of truth;
but they press down on them, keeping them lowered and fixed on
mere desire. It's never possible for their victims to return to their
true selves. If by chance they ever find some respite, they still roll
restlessly, just like the deep sea, which still swells even after the wind
has settled; they never find full relaxation from their desires. (4) You
think I'm talking only of those whose faults are admitted? Look at
those whose prosperity draws crowds: they are choked by their own
goods. How many have found their wealth a burden! How many are
drained of their blood by their eloquence and their daily preoccupa-
tion with showing off their abilities! How many are sickly pale from
their incessant pleasures! How many are left with no freedom from
the multitude of their besieging clients! In short, look over all of
them from lowest to highest: this person summons counsel to plead
his case, another answers the call; this one stands trial, another acts
for the defense, another presides as judge; no one acts as his own
champion, but each is wasted for another's sake. Ask about those in-
fluential citizens whose names are studiously memorized, and you'll
see that the following distinctions tell them apart: the first cultivates
a second, the second a third; no one is his own man. (5) Again certain
people give vent to the most irrational outbursts of anger: they com-
plain about the haughtiness of their superiors, because the latter were
too busy to receive them when they wanted an audience. Dare anyone
complain about another's arrogance when he himself never has time



to spare for himself? Yet the great man has occasionally, albeit with a
disdainful expression, condescended to look on you, whoever you are;
he has deigned to listen to your words, he has allowed you to walk
at his side. But you never thought fit to look on yourself or to listen
to yourself. And so you've no reason to expect a return from anyone
for those attentions of yours, since you offered them not because you
wanted another's company but because you were incapable of com-
muning with yourself.

(3.1) Though all the brilliant minds that have shone over the ages
agree on this one point, they could never adequately express their
astonishment at this dark fog in the human mind. No one lets anyone
seize his estates, and if a trivial dispute arises about boundary lines,
there's a rush to stones and arms; but people let others trespass on
their existence — or rather, they go so far as to invite in those who'll
take possession of their lives. You'll find no one willing to distribute
his money; but to how many people each of us shares out his life!
Men are thrifty in guarding their private property, but as soon as it
comes to wasting time, they are most extravagant with the one com-
modity for which it's respectable to be greedy.

(2) And so I'd like to collar one of the older crowd: "I see that
you've reached the limit of human life, you're pressing hard on your
hundredth year or more; come now, submit your life to an audit. Cal-
culate how much of your time has been taken up by a moneylender,
how much by a mistress, how much by a patron, how much by a cli-
ent, how much in arguing with your wife, in punishing your slaves, in
running about the city on social duties. Add to your calculations the
illnesses that we've inflicted on ourselves, and also the time that has
lain idle: you'll see that you've fewer years than you count. (3) Look
back and recall when you were ever sure of your purpose; how few
days turned out as you'd intended; when you were ever at your own
disposal; when your face showed its own expression; when your mind
was free from disturbance; what accomplishment you can claim in
such a long life; how many have plundered your existence without
your being aware of what you were losing; how much time has been
lost to groundless anguish, foolish pleasure, greedy desire, the charms
of society; how little is left to you from your own store of time. You'll
come to realize that you're dying before your time."

(4) What, then, is the reason for this? Your sort live as if you're



going to live forever, your own human frailty never enters your head,
you don't keep an eye on how much time has passed already. You
waste time as if it comes from a source full to overflowing, when all
the while that very day which is given over to someone or something
may be your last. You're like ordinary mortals in fearing everything,
you're like immortals in coveting everything. (5) You'll hear many say:
"After my fiftieth year I'll retire to a life of leisure; my sixtieth year
will bring release from all my duties." And what guarantee, may I
ask, do you have that your life will last longer? Who will allow those
arrangements of yours to proceed according to plan? Are you not
ashamed to keep for yourself only the remnants of your existence, and
to allocate to philosophical thought only that portion of time which
can't be applied to any business? How late it is to begin living just
when life must come to an end! What foolish obliviousness to our
mortality to put off wise plans to our fiftieth and sixtieth year, and to
want to begin life from a point that few have reached!

(4.1) You'll find that the most powerful men of high position
drop words in which they pray for leisure, praise it, and prefer it to
all their blessings. They sometimes long to step down from that pin-
nacle of theirs, if they can safely do so; for even without any external
disturbance or shock, fortune crashes down on itself under its own
weight.

(2) The divine Augustus, to whom the gods gave more than to
any man, never ceased to pray for rest for himself and to seek release
from the affairs of state. Every conversation of his kept coming back
to this theme, that he was hoping for leisure; he would relieve his
toils with this sweet, even if illusory, consolation, the thought that
one day he would live for himself. (3) In a letter that he sent to the
senate, when he had given an assurance that his retirement would
not be wanting in dignity and not be inconsistent with his former
prestige, I find the following words: "But such things are more im-
pressive in their fulfillment than in their promise. Yet my deep desire
for that time, which I have long prayed for, has led me to anticipate
something of its delight by the pleasure of words, since the joy of
that reality is still slow in coming." 4 (4) Leisure seemed such a desir-
able thing that, because he couldn't enjoy it in reality, he enjoyed the
thought of it in advance. He who saw that the world depended on
him and him alone, who determined the fortunes of individuals and



nations, he was happiest in looking forward to that day on which he
would lay aside his greatness. (5) He knew by experience how much
sweat was wrung from him by those blessings that gleamed the world
over; he knew the scale of the hidden anxieties they veiled. 5 Forced
to contend in arms first with his fellow citizens, then with his col-
leagues, and finally with his relatives, he shed blood by land and sea.
Driven by war through Macedonia, Sicily, Egypt, Syria, and Asia and
almost every known land, he turned his armies to foreign wars when
they were weary of slaughtering Romans. While he was pacifying the
Alps and subjugating enemies embedded in the heart of the peace-
ful empire, and while he was extending its boundaries beyond the
Rhine and Euphrates and Danube, in the city itself Murena, Caepio,
Lepidus, Egnatius, and others were whetting their swords against
him. (6) He had not yet escaped their intrigues when his daughter
and so many noble paramours, bound by adultery as if by an oath of
allegiance, kept causing him alarm in his now-failing years — as did
Iullus and a woman once again posing a threat with her Antony. 6 He
had cut away these sores, limbs and all, but others kept growing up
in their place; as if overburdened with blood, the body politic was
always hemorrhaging somewhere. That is why Augustus prayed for
leisure, and why he found relief from his labors in hoping for it and
thinking of it; this was the prayer of the man who could grant the
prayers of other men.

(5.1) Marcus Cicero was storm-tossed among the likes of Catiline
and Clodius, of Pompey and Crassus, declared enemies on the one
side, doubtful friends on the other. 7 He was buffeted along with the
ship of state, which he tried to keep steady as it was going down, but
he was finally swept away. He was neither at ease in prosperity nor
capable of withstanding adversity; how many times does he curse
that very consulship of his, 8 which he had extolled not without rea-
son but without ceasing! (2) How pitiful are the words that he wrings
from himself in a letter written to Atticus, when the elder Pompey
had been defeated and his son was still trying to revive his shattered
forces in Spain! 9 "You ask," he says, "what I'm doing here? I'm linger-
ing in my Tusculan estate, half-free." 10 After that, he goes on to other
statements in which he bemoans his former life, complains about
the present, and despairs of the future. (3) "Half-free," Cicero said
of himself. But needless to say, the sage will never resort to such an



abject term. He will never be half-free but will always enjoy complete
and unalloyed liberty. Not subject to any constraints, he will be his
own master and tower above all others. For what can there be above
the man who rises above fortune?

(6.1) Livius Drusus 11 was a vigorously energetic man who,
thronged about by a huge crowd from the whole of Italy, had agitated
for radical legislation and provoked the kind of troubles the Gracchi
had. But he could see no clear way out for his policies, which he was
unable to carry through and which, once started, it was no longer
an option to abandon. He is said to have cursed the life of constant
activity that he'd led from its very beginnings, saying that he was the
only person who had never had a holiday even as a boy. While he
was still a ward and had yet to assume the adult toga, he ventured to
plead before juries on behalf of defendants and to exert his special
influence in the courts — to such effect, in fact, that it's generally ac-
cepted that he captured several verdicts against the odds. (2) Where
would such precocious ambition not find an outlet? You might have
known that such premature presumptuousness would lead to disaster
both for him and for the state. And so it was too late when he began
complaining that he'd never had a holiday, since he'd been a trouble-
maker and a burden to the forum from his boyhood. It is unclear
whether he died by his own hand. He fell suddenly from a wound
to the groin; some doubted whether his death was self-inflicted, no
one that it was timely.

(3) It would be superfluous to mention more figures who, although
they seemed to others the happiest of mortals, themselves gave true
testimony against themselves when they expressed intense hatred for
every act of their lives. Yet by these complaints they changed neither
themselves nor anyone else; for after the outburst, their feelings re-
verted to their normal state. (4) In reality, your life, even if you live
a thousand years and more, will be compressed into the merest span
of time; those vices of yours will swallow up any number of lifetimes.
To be sure, this span of time, which good management prolongs even
though it naturally hurries on, must in your case escape you quickly;
for you fail to seize it and hold it back, and you do nothing to delay
that speediest of all things, but you allow it to pass as if it were some-
thing overabundant that we can get back again.

(7.1) In fact, among the worst cases I count also those who give



their time to nothing but drink and lust; for these are the most
shameful preoccupations of all. Other people, even if the semblance
of glory that grips them is false, nevertheless go astray in respectable
fashion. You can cite for me people who are greedy, those quick to
anger, or people who busy themselves with unjust hatreds or wars;
but all of them sin in a more manly fashion. It is those abandoned
to the belly and lust who bear the stain of dishonor. (2) Scrutinize
every moment of such people's lives, and note how much time they
spend on their ledger-keeping, how much on setting traps or fearing
them, how much on cultivating others or being cultivated by others,
how much on giving or receiving bail, how much on dinner parties
which have themselves become business: you'll see that their affairs,
whether good or bad, allow them no time to draw breath.

(3) To sum up, everyone agrees that no one area of activity can
be successfully pursued by someone who is preoccupied — rhetoric
cannot, nor can the liberal arts — since the distracted mind takes
in nothing really deeply but rejects everything that is, so to speak,
pounded into it. Nothing is less characteristic of a man preoccupied
than living: there is no knowledge that is harder to acquire. Instruc-
tors of other disciplines are two a penny; indeed, mere boys have
been seen to master some of these disciplines so thoroughly that
they could even be masters in the classroom. But learning how to
live takes a whole lifetime, and — you'll perhaps be more surprised
at this — it takes a whole lifetime to learn how to die. 12 (4) So many
men of the highest station have set aside all their encumbrances,
renounced their wealth, their business, their pleasures, and right up
to the very end of life they have made it their sole aim to know how
to live. Nevertheless, the majority of them depart from life admit-
ting that they did not yet have such knowledge — still less have those
others attained it. (5) Believe me, it's the mark of a great man, and
one rising above human weakness, to allow no part of his time to
be skimmed off. Accordingly, such a person's life is extremely long
because he's kept available for himself the whole of whatever amount
of time he had. None of it lay fallow and uncultivated, and none of
it was under another's control; for being a most careful guardian of
his time, he found nothing worth exchanging for it. And so that man
had enough time; but those deprived of much of their life by the
public have necessarily had too little.



(6) Nor should you imagine that those people aren't sometimes
conscious of their loss. Certainly you'll hear many of those burdened
by their great prosperity occasionally cry out amid their hordes of
clients or their pleadings of cases or their other respectable forms of
wretchedness: "I've no chance to live." (7) Of course you don't! All
those who engage you in their business disengage you from yourself.
How many days did that defendant of yours take from you? How
many that candidate? Or that old lady, wearied as she is by burying
her heirs? Or that character who feigns illness to excite the greed of
legacy hunters? Or that powerful friend who holds on to you not for
true friendship but for show? Check off, I say, and review the days
of your life: you'll see that very few of them, and those the worthless
ones, have stayed in your possession. (8) The man who's achieved
the high office he'd prayed for longs to lay it aside and repeatedly
says: "When will this year end?" The man who puts on the games
thought it a great privilege that responsibility for giving them fell
to him. Now he says: "When will I be free of them?" That advocate
has people competing for his attention throughout the forum; with
the crowd he draws, he fills the whole place further than he can be
heard: "When," he says, "will there be a vacation?" Everyone sends
his life racing headlong and suffers from a longing for the future, a
loathing of the present. (9) But the person who devotes every sec-
ond of his time to his own needs and who organizes each day as
if it were a complete life neither longs for nor is afraid of the next
day. For what new kind of pleasure is there that any hour can now
bring? Everything has been experienced, everything enjoyed to the
full. For the rest, fortune may make arrangements as it wishes; his
life has already reached safety. Addition can be made to this life, but
nothing taken away from it — and addition made in the way that a
man who is already satisfied and full takes a portion of food which he
doesn't crave and yet has room for. (10) So there's no reason to believe
that someone has lived long because he has gray hair and wrinkles:
he's not lived long but long existed. For suppose you thought that a
person had sailed far who'd been caught in a savage storm as soon as
he left harbor, and after being carried in this direction and that, was
driven in circles over the same course by alternations of the winds
raging from different quarters: he didn't have a long voyage, but he
was long tossed about.



(8.i) I am always astonished when I see people requesting the
time of others and receiving a most accommodating response from
those they approach. Both sides focus on the object of the request,
and neither side on time itself; it is requested as if it were nothing,
granted as if it were nothing. People trifle with the most precious
commodity of all; and it escapes their notice because its an im-
material thing that doesn't appear to the eyes, and for that reason
it's valued very cheaply — or rather, it has practically no value at all.
(2) People set very great store by annuities and gratuities, and for
these they hire out their services or their efforts or their attentions.
But no one values time: all use it more than lavishly, as if it cost noth-
ing. But if mortal danger threatens them, you'll see the same people
clasping their doctors' knees; if they fear a capital charge, you'll see
them ready to spend all they have to stay alive. So great is the conflict
in their feelings. (3) But if each of us could see the number of years
before us as precisely as the years that have passed, how alarmed
would be those who saw only a few years left, and how carefully
would they use them! And yet it's easy to manage an amount, how-
ever small, which is clearly defined; we have to be more careful in
conserving an amount that may give out at any time.

(4) Yet there's no reason to believe that those people are unaware
of how precious a commodity time is. They habitually say to those
they love most intensely that they are ready to give them some of
their own years. And they do give them without knowing it; but they
give in such a way that, without adding to the years of their loved
ones, they subtract from themselves. But this very point, namely,
whether they are depriving themselves, eludes them, and so they can
bear the loss of what goes unnoticed in the losing. (5) No one will
bring back the years, no one will restore you to your former self. Life
will follow the path on which it began, and it will neither reverse
nor halt its course. It will cause no commotion at all, it will call no
attention to its own swiftness. It will glide on in silence. It will pro-
long itself at neither a king's command nor his people's clamor; it
will run on just as it started out on the first day, with no diversions
and no delays. And the outcome? You've been preoccupied while life
hurries on; death looms all the while, and like it or not, you have to
accommodate it.

(9.1) Can there be anything sillier than the view of those people



who boast of their foresight? They are too busily preoccupied with
efforts to live better; they plan out their lives at the expense of life
itself. They form their purposes with the distant future in mind. Yet
the greatest waste of life lies in postponement: it robs us of each day
in turn, and snatches away the present by promising the future. The
greatest impediment to living is expectancy, which relies on tomor-
row and wastes today. You map out what is in fortune's hand but let
slip what's in your own hand. What are you aiming at? What's your
goal? All that's to come lies in uncertainty: live right now. (2) Hear
the cry of the greatest of poets, who sings his salutary song as if
inspired with divine utterance:

Each finest day of life for wretched mortals
is ever the first to flee. 13

"Why are you holding back?" he says. "Why are you slow to action?
If you don't seize the day, it slips away." Even when you've seized it,
it will still slip away; and so you must compete with time's quickness
in the speed with which you use it, and you must drink swiftly as
if from a fast-moving torrent that will not always flow. (3) This too
the poet very aptly says in chastising interminable procrastination:
not each best "age" but each best "day." Carefree and unconcerned
even though time flies so quickly, why do you project for yourself
months and years in long sequence, to whatever extent your greed
sees fit? The poet is speaking to you about the day — about this very
day which is slipping away. (4) So can there be any doubt that each
finest day is ever the first to flee for wretched mortals — that is, the
preoccupied? Old age takes their still childish minds unawares, and
they meet it unprepared and unarmed; for they've made no provision
for it. Suddenly, unsuspecting, they've stumbled upon it, without no-
ticing that it was drawing nearer every day. (5) Just as conversation or
reading or some deep reflection beguiles travelers and they find that
they've reached their destination before being aware of approaching
it, so with this ceaseless and extremely rapid journey of life, which we
make at the same pace whether awake or sleeping: the preoccupied
become aware of it only at its end.

(10.1) If I wanted to divide my subject into categories, each with
its proofs, I could come up with many arguments to demonstrate that
the life of the preoccupied is very short. But Fabianus, 14 who was not



one of today s chair-holding professionals but a true philosopher of
the old-fashioned sort, was in the habit of saying that we must battle
against the passions with a vigorous attack, not with nicety of argu-
ment; the enemy line is to be turned by a full-frontal assault, not by
tiny pinpricks. He has no regard for mere quibbling, for vices are to
be crushed, not merely nipped at. Nevertheless, for the preoccupied
to be censured for their distinctive failing, they are to be taught a
lesson, not simply given up for lost.

(2) Life is divided into three parts: past, present, and future. Of
these, the present is brief, the future doubtful, the past certain. For
this last is the category over which fortune no longer has control, and
which cannot be brought back under anyone's power. Preoccupied
people lose this part; for they have no leisure to look back at the
past, and even if they had it, there's no pleasure in recalling some-
thing regrettable. (3) And so they're unwilling to turn their minds
back to times badly spent, and they dare not revisit the past because
their vices become obvious in retrospect — even those that insinu-
ated themselves by the allurement of momentary pleasure. No one
gladly casts his thoughts back to the past except for the person whose
every action has been subjected to his own self-assessment, which is
infallible. (4) A man who's been ambitious in the scale of his desires,
arrogant in his disdainfulness, unrestrained in prevailing over others,
treacherous in his deceptions, greedy in his plunderings, and lavish
in his prodigality — such a man must inevitably be afraid of his own
memory. Yet this is the part of our existence that is consecrated and
set apart, elevated above all human vicissitudes and removed beyond
fortune's sway, and harried by no poverty, no fear, no attacks of dis-
ease. This part can be neither disrupted nor stolen away; our posses-
sion of it is everlasting and untroubled. Days are present only one at
a time, and these only minute by minute; but all the days of time past
will attend you at your bidding, and they will allow you to examine
them and hold on to them at your will — something which preoccu-
pied people have no time to do. (5) It takes a tranquil and untroubled
mind to roam freely over all the parts of life; but preoccupied minds,
as if under the yoke, cannot turn around and look backward. Their
life therefore disappears into an abyss; and just as it does no good to
pour any amount of liquid into a vessel if there's nothing at the bot-
tom to receive and keep it, 15 so it makes no difference how much time



we are given if there's nowhere for it to settle, and it's allowed to pass
through the cracks and holes in the mind. (6) The present time is
very brief — indeed, so very brief that to some people 16 it seems to be
nonexistent. For it's always in motion, slipping by and hurrying on;
it ceases to be before it arrives, and it no more suffers delay than do
the firmament or the heavenly bodies, whose ever- tireless movement
never lets them remain in the same position. So the preoccupied are
concerned with the present alone, and it is so fleeting that it can't
be grasped, and even that little amount is stolen away from them
because they're pulled in many different directions.

(11.1) In a word, do you want to know how briefly they really
live? See how keen they are to live a long life. Enfeebled old men
beg in their prayers for an additional few years; they pretend they are
younger than they really are; they flatter themselves by this falsehood,
and deceive themselves as gladly as if they deceived fate at the same
time. But when some real illness has at last reminded them that they
are mortal', how terrified they are when they die, as if they're not leav-
ing life but are being dragged from it! They cry out repeatedly that
they've been fools because they've not really lived, and that they'll live
in leisure if only they escape their illness. Then they reflect on how
uselessly they made provision for things they wouldn't live to enjoy,
and how fruitless was all their toil. (2) But why should life not be
ample for people who spend it far removed from all business? None
of it is made over to another, none scattered in this direction or that;
none of it is entrusted to fortune, none wasted through neglect; none
is lost through being given away freely, none is superfluous; the whole
of life yields a return, so to speak. And so, however short, it is amply
sufficient; and for that reason, whenever his last day comes, the sage
will not hesitate to go to his death with a sure step.

(12.1) You perhaps want to know whom I'd term the preoccu-
pied? Don't imagine that I mean only those lawyers who are driven
out of the law court only when the watchdogs are finally let in for
the night; or those patrons you see crushed either with impressive
display in their own crowd of admirers or more contemptuously in
someone else's crowd; or those clients whose duties summon them
from their own houses in order to dash them against the doors of
others; or those the praetor's spear keeps busy for disreputable gain
which is someday bound to fester. 17 (2) Even the leisure of some



people is preoccupied: in their country retreat or on their couch, in
the midst of their solitude, and even though they've withdrawn from
everyone, they are troubling company for themselves; their existence
is to be termed not leisurely but one of idle preoccupation. Do you
call a man at leisure who arranges with meticulous attention to detail
his Corinthian bronzes, which are made so expensive by the collect-
ing mania of a few, and who spends most of the day on rusty strips
of copper? Or a man who sits at a wrestling ring (for — shame on
us! — we suffer from vices that are not even Roman), enthusiasti-
cally watching boys brawling? Who separates the troops of his own
well-oiled wrestlers into pairs of the same age and skin color? Who
maintains a stable of the freshest athletes? (3) Tell me, do you call
those people leisured who spend many hours at the barber's while
any overnight growth is trimmed away, solemn consultation is taken
over each separate hair, and disheveled locks are rearranged or thin-
ning hair is combed forward from both sides to cover the forehead?
How angry they get if the barber has been a little too careless, as if
he were cutting a real mans hair! How they flare up if anything is
wrongly cut off their precious mane, if a hair lies out of place, or if
everything doesn't fall back into its proper ringlets! Which of those
people wouldn't rather have their country thrown into disarray than
their hair? Who isn't more concerned about keeping his head neat
rather than safe? Who wouldn't rather be well groomed than well
respected? You call leisured these people who are kept busy between
the comb and the mirror? (4) What about those who are absorbed in
composing, listening to, and learning songs? The voice, whose best
and simplest flow is naturally straightforward, they twist into sinuous
turns of the most feeble crooning. Their fingers are always snapping
in time to some song that they carry in their head, and when they've
been asked to attend to serious and often even sorrowful matters, you
can overhear them quietly humming a tune. Theirs isn't leisure but
idle occupation. (5) And heaven knows! I'd not class their banquets
among leisurely pastimes, because I see how anxiously they arrange
their silver plate, how carefully they gather up the tunics of their
pretty boys-at-table, how they are on tenterhooks to see how the
boar turns out from the cook, how quickly the smooth-skinned slaves
hurry to discharge their duties at the given signal, how skillfully
birds are carved into carefully shaped portions, and how attentively



wretched little slave boys wipe away the spittle of drunks. By these
means they seek a reputation for refinement and sumptuous living,
and their evils follow them into every corner of their lives to such
an extent that they cannot eat or drink without ostentation. (6) Nor
would I count among the leisured those who have themselves carried
around in a sedan chair and litter, and who arrive precisely on time
for their rides, as if they were forbidden to skip them; and who have
to be reminded of their scheduled time for bathing, for swimming, or
for dining: they are so enervated by the excessive sloth of a pampered
mind that they can't tell by themselves if they are hungry. (7) I hear
that one of these pampered creatures — if pampered is the right word
for unlearning life and normal human practice — was manually lifted
out of the bath and set down in his sedan chair, and asked: "Am I now
seated?" Do you think that someone like this, who doesn't know if
he is sitting, knows whether he's alive, whether he can see, whether
he's at leisure? It's hard for me to say whether I pity him more if he
really didn't know as much or if he pretended not to know. (8) They
are oblivious to many things, but they also affect forgetfulness of
much. They find certain vices pleasing as evidence of their prosper-
ity: to know what you're doing seems to be the mark of a man who's
lowly and contemptible. What folly to think that mime actors 18 feign
many details in order to attack luxury! Truth be told, they pass over
more than they fabricate, and such a wealth of unbelievable vices
has arisen in an age that has applied its fertile talents in this one
direction that by now we can charge the mime actors with ignoring
them. To imagine that there's anyone so ruined by pampering that
he takes another's word as to whether he's seated! (9) So here is not
a person of leisure; you should apply a different term to him. He is
sick or rather as good as dead; the truly leisured person is one who is
also conscious of his own leisure. But a person who needs a guide to
make him aware of his own bodily positions is only half-alive; how
can he be in control of any of his time?

(13. 1) It would be a long business to run through the individual
cases of people who've spent their whole lives playing checkers or
playing ball, or baking their bodies in the sun. People whose plea-
sures put them to considerable work are not at leisure. For instance,
nobody will doubt that those who devote their time to useless lit-
erary questions — Rome too now has a significant number of such



people — are busily engaged in doing nothing. 19 (2) It was once the
well-known failing of the Greeks to ask how many rowers Ulysses
had, whether the Iliad or the Odyssey was written first, and also
whether they belong to the same author, and other questions of the
same stamp which, if you keep them to yourself, do nothing to im-
prove your private knowledge; and if you divulge them, you're made
to appear not more learned but more annoying. (3) And now this
vacuous enthusiasm for acquiring useless knowledge has infected the
Romans as well. Only a few days ago I heard someone 20 mentioning
which Roman general had been the first to do what: Duilius was
the first to win a battle at sea, 21 Curius Dentarus the first to parade
elephants in a triumph. 22 So far, even if such items as these hardly
steer us toward true glory, they still involve models of service to the
state; such knowledge isn't going to profit us, but it's nevertheless of
the sort to hold our interest because its subject matter, though empty,
is appealing. (4) We may also excuse investigators who ask who first
persuaded the Romans to deploy a naval force (it was Claudius, 23 who
was called Caudex for this reason, because the ancients termed the
composite structure of several planks a caudex\ hence the public rec-
ords are called codices, and the barges which carry provisions up the
Tiber are still called codicariae in accordance with ancient practice).
(5) Doubtless also this may have some relevance — the fact that Va-
lerius Corvinus was the first to conquer Messana, 24 and was the first
of the family of the Valerii to be called Messana after appropriating
the name of the captured city; common usage gradually changed the
lettering, so he became Messalla. (6) But will you also allow interest
in the fact that L. Sulla was the first to display lions off the leash in
the circus, 25 though as a general rule they were shown in chains, and
that javelin throwers were supplied by king Bocchus 26 to dispatch
them? All right, let's allow that as well; but is any useful purpose re-
ally served by knowing that Pompey was the first to put on a fight in
the circus involving eighteen elephants, 27 with noncriminals arrayed
against them in mock battle? A leader of the state and a man of out-
standing kindliness, as his reputation has it; among leaders of old, he
thought it a memorable form of spectacle to destroy human beings
in unheard-of fashion. "They fight to the death? That's not enough.
They're torn to pieces? Not enough: let them be utterly crushed by
animals of massive bulk!" (7) It would certainly be preferable for such



stuff to be forgotten, for fear that some future strongman might learn
of it and be envious of an utterly inhuman episode. O what dark-
ness great prosperity casts on our minds! He thought he was above
the laws of nature when he was throwing so many hordes of human
wretches to beasts born under a different sky, when he was arrang-
ing war between such disparate creatures, when he was shedding so
much blood before the eyes of the Roman people — people he'd later
force to shed still more blood themselves. But this same man was
later taken in by Alexandrian treachery and offered himself to be run
through by the meanest of his chattels; 28 then at last he recognized
the empty boast that was his own surname. 29

(8) But to return to the point from which I digressed, and to
demonstrate the futility of the pains that some people take in these
same matters: the same source 30 reported that Metellus, in his tri-
umph after conquering the Carthaginians in Sicily, was alone of all
Romans in having 120 captured elephants led in procession before
his chariot; 31 and that Sulla was the last Roman to extend the pome-
rium, which it was the custom of old to extend after the acquisition
of Italian, but never provincial, territory. 32 Is there any more ben-
efit in knowing this than to know that the Aventine Hill is outside
the pomerium, according to him, for one of two reasons: either be-
cause that was the rallying point for the plebeians in secession from
Rome, 33 or because the birds had not been propitious when Remus
took the auspices there; 34 and to know countless other items besides
that are either crammed with lies or improbable? (9) For even if you
grant that people say all these things in good faith, and even if they
guarantee the truthfulness of their writing, whose mistakes will such
items of information make fewer? Whose passions will they hold in
check? Whom will they make braver, or more just, or more generous
of spirit? My friend Fabianus used to say that he sometimes won-
dered whether it was better to apply oneself to no researches at all
than to be embroiled in these.

(14.1) Of all people, they alone who give their time to philosophy
' are at leisure, they alone really live. For it's not just their own lifetime
that they watch over carefully, but they annex every age to their own;
all the years that have gone before are added to their own. Unless
we prove most ungrateful, those most distinguished founders of hal-
lowed thoughts came into being for us, and for us they prepared a



way of living. We are led by the work of others into the presence of
the most beautiful treasures, which have been pulled from darkness
and brought to light. From no age are we debarred, we have access
to all; and if we want to transcend the narrow limitations of hu-
man weakness by our expansiveness of mind, there is a great span of
time for us to range over. (2) We can debate with Socrates, entertain
doubt with Carneades, 35 be at peace with Epicurus, overcome hu-
man nature with the Stoics, and go beyond it with the Cynics. 36
Since nature allows us shared possession of any age, why not turn
from this short and fleeting passage of time and give ourselves over
completely to the past, which is measureless and eternal and shared
with our betters? (3) As for those who run about performing their so-
cial duties, agitating themselves and others: when they've duly acted
like madmen, when they've crossed every threshold on their daily
rounds and passed no open door, and when they've delivered their
moneygrubbing greeting to houses very distant from one another,
how few patrons will they be able to catch sight of in a city so vast
and so fragmented by varied passions! (4) How many patrons will
there be whose sleep or self-indulgence or churlishness denies their
callers access! How many who, after they've tortured them with the
long wait, pretend to be in a hurry as they pass them by! How many
will avoid going out through a reception hall packed with clients
and make their escape through a door that's hidden from view, as if
it were not even cruder to deceive them than to refuse them admit-
tance! How many, half- asleep and weighed down by the effects of
yesterday's drinking, will yawn with utter disdain and address those
wretched clients, who cut short their own sleep in order to wait on
another's, by the right name only after it's been whispered to them
a thousand times over by lips that hardly move! 37 (5) Do we suppose
these clients spend time on morally commendable duties? But we
can say as much of those who'll want to have Zeno, Pythagoras,
Democritus, and the other high priests of philosophical study, and
Aristotle and Theophrastus, as their closest companions every day.
None of these will ever be unavailable to you, none of these will fail
to send his visitor off in a happier condition and more at ease with
himself. None will let anyone leave empty handed; they can be ap-
proached by all mortals by night and by day.

(15.1) None of these philosophers will force you to die, but all will



teach you how. 38 None of them will diminish your years, but each will
share his own years with you. With none of them will conversation
be dangerous, friendship life threatening, or cultivation of them ex-
pensive. From them you'll take whatever you wish; it will be no fault
of theirs if you fail to take in the very fullest amount you have room
for. (2) What happiness, what a fine old age lies in store for the per-
son who's put himself under the patronage of these people! He'll have
friends whose advice he can seek on the greatest or least important
matters, whom he can consult daily about himself, from whom he
can hear the truth without insult and receive praise without fawning,
and who will provide a model after which to fashion himself.

(3) There is a common saying that it was not in our power to
choose the parents we were allotted, and that they were given to us by
chance; yet we can be born to whomever we wish. There are house-
holds of the most distinguished intellects: choose the one into which
you'd like to be adopted, and you'll inherit not just the name but also
the actual property, which is not to be hoarded in a miserly or mean
spirit: the more people you share it with, the greater it will become.
(4) These will open for you the path to immortality, and raise you to
an elevation from which no one is cast down. This is the sole means
of prolonging mortality, or rather of transforming it into immortality.
Honors, monuments, all that ostentatious ambition has ordered by
decree or erected in stone, are soon destroyed: there's nothing that
the long lapse of time doesn't demolish and transform. But it cannot
harm the works consecrated by wisdom: no age will efface them,
no age reduce them at all. The next age and each one after that will
only enhance the respect in which they are held, since envy focuses
on what is close at hand, but we more freely admire things from a
distance. (5) So the sage's life is ample in scope, and he's not con-
stricted by the same limit that confines others. He alone is released
from the limitations of the human race, and he is master of all ages
as though a god. Some time has passed? He holds it in recollection.
Time is upon us? He uses it. Time is to come? This he anticipates.
The combining of all times into one makes his life long.

(16. 1) But for those who forget the past, disregard the present,
and fear for the future, life is very brief and very troubled. When
they reach the end of it, they realize too late, poor wretches, that
they've been busied for so long in doing nothing. (2) And the fact



that they sometimes pray for death need hardly be taken as evidence
that their life is long. In their folly they are afflicted by fickle feel-
ings that rush them into the very things they fear; they often pray
for death precisely because they fear it. (3) And there's no reason to
find evidence that they live long in the fact that the day often seems
long to them, or that they complain that the hours pass slowly until
the appointed hour for dinner arrives; for when their usual preoc-
cupations fail them and they are left with nothing to do, they fret
without knowing how to apply their free time or how to drag it out.
And so they move on to some other preoccupation and find all the
intervening time burdensome, precisely as they do when a gladiato-
rial show has been announced for a given day, or when the date of
some other show or amusement is keenly awaited, and they want to
skip over the days in between. Any postponement of something they
look forward to is long to them. (4) But the time of actual enjoyment
is short and fleeting, and made far shorter by their own fault; for they
desert one pleasure for another and cannot persist steadily in any one
desire. Their days aren't long but hateful; yet, on the other hand, how
short seem the nights that they spend cavorting with prostitutes or
drinking! (5) Hence the mad inspiration of poets too who feed hu-
man frailty by their stories and imagine that Jupiter actually doubled
the length of the night 39 when seduced by sexual pleasure. All this
inflaming of our worst passions amounts to nothing but enlisting
the gods as setting a precedent for our vices, and giving a license for
corruption that is justified by divine example. How can the nights
that they pay for so dearly not seem so very short to these people?
They lose the day in looking forward to the night, the night in fear
of the dawn.

(17.1) The very pleasures of such people are anxious and disturbed
by various kinds of alarm, and at the very moment when they are
rejoicing the agitated thought steals in on them: "How long will this
last?" It is this feeling that has caused kings to weep over their own
power; the extent of their prosperity gave them no pleasure, but the
prospect of its eventual end terrified them. (2) When that exceed-
ingly arrogant king of the Persians ranged his army over the vast
plains and could only measure its size, not count it, he wept at the
thought that within a century not one soldier from that huge force
would still be alive. 40 Yet the very man who wept was destined to



bring their fate on them, to lose some troops at sea, others on land,
some in battle, 41 others in flight, and so to destroy in a very short
time all those for whose hundredth year he feared. (3) And what of
the fact that even the joys of such people are anxiety ridden? This is
because they don't rest on stable causes but are disrupted as frivo-
lously as they are produced. But what do you think their times are
like when they are wretched even by their own admission, since even
the joys which lift and transport them above their fellow men are by
no means unmixed? (4) All the greatest blessings cause anxiety, and
fortune is never less wisely trusted than when at its most advanta-
geous. To maintain prosperity we need fresh prosperity, and other
prayers are to be offered instead of those that have already turned
out well. Everything that comes our way by chance is unsteady, and
the hi'gher our fortunes rise, the more susceptible they are to falling.
But what must inevitably collapse gives no one pleasure; and so the
life of those who acquire through hard work what they must work
harder to possess is necessarily very wretched, and not just very brief.
(5) They obtain with great effort what they desire, and they anx-
iously hold on to what they've obtained; and meanwhile they give no
consideration to time's irretrievability. New preoccupations take the
place of old, hope arouses new hope, ambition new ambition. They
don't look for an end to their wretchedness, but change the cause of
it. We've been tormented by our own public office? We spend more
time on somebody else's. We've stopped toiling as candidates? We
start canvassing for others. We've given up the vexation of being a
prosecutor? We take on that of being a judge. A man stops being a
judge? He starts presiding over a special commission. A man's spent
all his working life managing other people's property for a salary?
He's diverted by looking after his own wealth. (6) Marius was done
with army service, and the consulship kept him busy. 42 Quintius hur-
ries to get through his dictatorship, but he'll be called back to it from
his plow. 43 Scipio will go up against the Carthaginians before being
fully ready for such an undertaking. 44 Victorious over Hannibal, vic-
torious over Antiochus, he will win distinction in his own consulship
and act as surety for his brother's consulship; 45 and but for his own
objections, his statue would be placed in Jupiter's company in the
Capitoline temple. But discord among the citizens will bring trouble
to their savior, and after he has scorned as a young man public honors



rivaling those of the gods, in old age he'll eventually take pleasure
in an ostentatiously defiant exile. Reasons for anxiety will never be
wanting, whether because of prosperity or wretchedness. Life will be
driven on through one preoccupation after another; we shall always
pray for leisure but never attain it.

(18.1) And so, my dearest Paulinus, remove yourself from the
crowd and, storm-tossed more than your years deserve, withdraw
at last to a more peaceful haven. Consider how many waves you've
endured and, on the one side, how many storms you've weathered in
private and, on the other, how many you've brought on yourself in
your public career. Long enough has your virtue been demonstrated
through toilsome and unceasing proofs; put to the test what it can
achieve in leisure. The greater part of your life, and certainly the
better part, has been given to the state: take some of your time for
yourself as well. (2) It's not to a sluggish and idle state of inaction
that I summon you, or to drown all your lively energy in sleep and
in the pleasures that are dear to the crowd. That's not to find peace
of mind: you'll find tasks to busy yourself about in serene seclusion
that are more important than any you've dealt with so energetically
thus far. (3) You manage the revenues of the world, it is true, as scru-
pulously as you would a stranger's, as diligently as you would your
own, as conscientiously as you would the state's. You win affection
in a post in which it is hard to avoid being hated. Yet it is neverthe-
less better — believe me — to know the balance sheet of one's own
life than that of the public grain supply. (4) Recall that energetic
mind of yours, which is supremely qualified to deal with the greatest
challenges, from an office that is certainly eminent but is hardly in
keeping with the happy life. And consider that you didn't make it
your aim, with all your training in the liberal arts from the earliest
age, for many thousands of grain measures to be safely entrusted to
you; you'd shown promise of something greater and higher. There'll
be no shortage of men of both scrupulous good character and dili-
gent service. But slow-moving pack animals are far better suited to
carrying heavy loads than thoroughbred horses; who ever hampered
the fleetness of these well-bred creatures with a weighty burden?
(5) Consider, moreover, how stressful it is to subject yourself to such
a heavy responsibility; you have to deal with the human stomach,
and a hungry people neither submits to reason nor is soothed by fair



treatment or influenced by any entreaty. Only recently, within those
few days after Gaius Caesar died, he was still pained to the utmost
(if the dead have any consciousness) because he saw that the Roman
people survived him and still had enough rations for seven or at all
events eight days; because he made his bridges of boats and played
with the empire's resources, 46 we faced the worst kind of disaster even
for people under siege: a shortage of food. His imitation of a crazed
foreign king of ill-fated arrogance almost came at the cost of mass
destruction by starvation, and of the general catastrophe that follows
famine. (6) What was the frame of mind of the officials in charge of
the grain supply when they were destined to face stones, weapons,
fires, and Gaius? With the greatest concealment they covered over
such a great sickness lurking amid the state's innermost organs, and
with good reason, to be sure. For certain complaints are to be treated
without the patient's being aware of them; knowing about their dis-
ease has caused many to die.

(19. 1) Retire to those pursuits that are calmer, safer, and more
important. Do you think it amounts to the same thing whether you're
in charge of seeing that imported grain is transferred to the granaries
undamaged by either the dishonesty or the carelessness of the trans-
porters, that it doesn't absorb moisture and then get spoiled through
heat, and that it corresponds to the declared weight and measure; or
whether you occupy yourself with these hallowed and lofty studies,
so as to learn the substance of god, his will, his general character,
and his shape; what outcome awaits your soul; where nature lays us
to rest upon release from our bodies; what it is that bears the weight
of all the heaviest matter of this world in the center, suspends the
light components above, carries fire to the highest part, and rouses
the stars to their given changes of movement; and to learn other such
matters in turn that are full of great wonders? (2) You really ought
to leave ground level and turn your mind's eye to these studies. Now,
while enthusiasm is still fresh, those with an active interest should
progress to better things. In this mode of life much that is worth
studying awaits you: the love and practice of the virtues, forgetful-
ness of the passions, knowledge of how to live and to die, and deep
repose.

(3) The plight of all preoccupied people is wretched, but most
wretched is the plight of those who labor under preoccupations that



are not even their own, whose sleep schedule is regulated by some-
body else's, who walk at somebody else's pace, and who are under
instructions in that freest of all activities — loving and hating. 47 If
these people want to know how short their life is, let them reflect on
how small a part of it is their very own.

(20.1) So, when you see a man repeatedly taking up the robe
of office, or a name well known in public, don't envy him: those
trappings are bought at the cost of life. For one year to be dated by
their name, they'll waste all their own years. 48 Life deserts some of
them amid their first struggles, before the arduous climb up to the
peak of their ambition. Some, after they've clambered up through a
thousand indignities to arrive at the crowning dignity, are assailed by
the wretched thought that all their toil has been for an inscription
on an epitaph. Some map out new aspirations for their extreme old
age as if in their youth, and they succumb to weakness amid their
great and immoderate endeavors. (2) It's a shameful end when an old
man acting in court for litigants who are perfectly unknown to him
breathes his last even at the moment when he's winning the applause
of impressionable bystanders. It's a disgraceful end when the man
who's sooner worn out by living than by working drops dead in the
middle of his duties; and a disgraceful end when a man dies in the act
of going over his accounts and draws a smile from the heir who's long
been kept waiting. (3) I can't pass over one example that occurs to me.
Gaius Turannius was an old man of proven diligence who was past
ninety when, on the emperor's initiative, he was granted retirement
from his administrative post by Gaius Caesar; 49 he gave instructions
for himself to be laid out on his bed and to be mourned by his as-
sembled household as if he were dead. The house lamented its elderly
master's unemployment and didn't cease their mourning until his job
was restored to him. Is it really such a pleasure to die preoccupied?
(4) Yet many have that same attitude, and their desire for work lasts
longer than their capacity for it. They struggle against their bodily
infirmity, and old age itself they adjudge a hardship for no other rea-
son than because it removes them from office. The law doesn't draft
a soldier after fifty, it doesn't require a senator's attendance after sixty:
it's harder for people to obtain retirement from themselves than from
the law. (5) All the time while they plunder and are plundered and
break in on each other's rest and make each other miserable, life is



without profit, without pleasure, without any progress of mind. No
one holds death in view, no one refrains from distant hopes. Indeed,
some people even make arrangements for things beyond life — huge
tomb structures, dedications of public buildings, gladiatorial shows
for the funeral, and ostentatious funeral processions. Yet in truth, the
funerals of such people should be conducted by the light of torches
and wax tapers, 50 as if they'd lived for the briefest span.



Notes



1. From the first Aphorism of Hippocrates of Cos, probably Socrates' con-
temporary in the later fifth century bce.

2. Attributed by Cicero {Tusculan Disputations 3.69) to Theophrastus,
Aristotle's associate and successor; possibly a simple misattribution, unless
Seneca deliberately invokes Aristotle as a weightier presence here alongside
Hippocrates.

3. A nonmetrical rendering of a poet whose identity is much disputed.
Cf. 9.2 for Virgil hailed as "the greatest of poets," and Letters 63.2 for Homer
as "the greatest of Greek poets"; but no clear trace of the dictum here is to be
found in either.

4. The letter is lost; Seneca is our sole witness to its existence. Its date is
unclear, as is its possible relation or relevance to historical reports of Augustus
contemplating retirement in the first decade of his rule.

5. Seneca proceeds to give a summary of Augustus's consolidation of power,
from the death of Caesar in 44 bce to Antony's defeat at Actium in 31; his
pacification of the near empire (the Alpine tribes, 7-6 bce); and his expan-
sion of the imperial margins. This emphasis on external gains is dramatically
contrasted with the threat brought increasingly closer to home in 4.5-6, first by
domestic troubles at Rome (through the conspiracies of M. Aemilius Lepidus
in 29 bce, Varro Murena and Fannius Caepio in 23/22, and M. Egnatius Rufus
in 19), then by sedition in the imperial household itself through the dangerous
liaisons of Julia, Augustus's daughter, who was banished in 2 bce.

6. Iullus, Antony's second son, was punished by death in 2 bce for adultery
with Julia, who is cast here as a second Cleopatra.

7. Catiline's notorious conspiracy to transform the Roman order by over-
throwing aristocratic senatorial power was thwarted by Cicero as consul in
63 bce. In 61 Cicero testified against R Clodius Pulcher, on trial for violating
the mysteries of the cult of Bona Dea; acquitted by bribery, Clodius took
revenge by securing Cicero's exile in 58. Pompey and Crassus were allies, with
Julius Caesar, in the First Triumvirate of 60; Cicero found Pompey in particu-
lar "a doubtful friend" when he was faced with exile in 58.

8. Apparendy a Senecan distortion: Cicero's extant writings yield no evi-
dence of any such detestation.

9. After Pompey 's defeat by Caesar at Pharsalus in 48 bce, Gnaeus, his
elder son, was defeated at Munda (Spain) in 45. But the allusion could extend
to Sextus, Gnaeus's brother, who prolonged Pompeian activities in Spain until
after Caesar's death in 44.



10. The words are nowhere found in Cicero's extensive extant correspon-
dence with T. Pomponius Atticus, his friend from boyhood and relation by
marriage.

11. As tribune in 91 bce Drusus introduced radical social legislation, in-
cluding land distributions for the poor and the enfranchisement of all Italians,
which provoked vigorous opposition. Drusus was assassinated, but in suggest-
ing that he committed suicide, Seneca here develops his most dramatic illus-
tration yet of the need for escape from the pressures of high but dangerous re-
sponsibility, and of personal fortunes collapsing on themselves (cf. 4.1).

12. The Stoic notion of "meditation on death" is Platonic in origin (e.g.,
Phaedo 6ye: "true philosophers diligently practice dying"). Seneca repeatedly
urges such meditation (e.g., Letters 70.18, 114.27) because of the liberation it
brings from fear of death (e.g., Letters 30.18, 36.8) by anticipating the soul's
release from bodily captivity (e.g., Consolation to Marcia 23.2).

13. Virgil Georgics 3.66-7; also quoted at Letters 108.24, 2 6.

14. Papirius Fabianus, ca. 35 BCE-before 35 ce, was a talented rhetorician
who, by ca. 10 bce, became a follower of CX Sextius, founder of Rome's only
indigenous philosophical school. Fabianus's teachings made a deep impression
on the young Seneca (cf. Letters 40.12, 58.6, 100 passim) as well as his father (cf.
Controuersiae 2 pref. 1-2).

15. A likely allusion to the fate of the Danaids, punished in the underworld
for killing their new husbands by having always to draw water with leaking
vessels or sieves.

16. Including those Stoics for whom the "now" point is itself ever fleeting
and never fully "real" or "here," being a part of the temporal continuum which
consistently moves along with the Stoic universe.

17. A spear was fixed in the ground at public auctions, apparently after
the ancient practice of selling war spoils under the victor's symbol of owner-
ship. The auctioneers overseeing the sale of state property (praecones publici)
belonged to the staff of magistrates, including praetors; hence "the praetor's
spear."

18. Mime was a theatrical medium for risque and often vulgar realism,
which Seneca elsewhere presents as having a popular moralizing component
(cf. Letters 8.8-9).

19. For Seneca the pedantry of the grammatici, whose numbers grew at
Rome in the first century ce, ignores the real relevance of literature and philol-
ogy in nurturing mature judgment.

20. Unknown; the elder Pliny has been suggested, but with no strong sup-
porting evidence. Seneca may simply be using a rhetorical device to introduce
the point in colloquial fashion.

21. Gaius Duilius; after leading the Roman fleet to victory over the
Carthaginians offMylae (Sicily) in 260 bce, he celebrated the first naval tri-
umph in 259.



22. In 275 bce, after Dentatus defeated Pyrrhus, the Molossian king of
Epirus; as a hero of the Samnite and other wars, and as an exemplar of humble
riving, see Consolation to Helvia 10.8.

23. Appius Claudius Caudex, consul in 264 bce; he crossed to Sicily in
the First Punic War to counter the alliance between the Carthaginians and
Hieron II of Syracuse.

24. M.' Valerius Maximus Messalla, consul in 263 bce, forced Hieron II of
Syracuse to come to terms with Rome in that year, and celebrated a triumph
for his capture of Sicilian Messana.

25. As praetor urbanus in 93 bce; leashed lions were apparently first exhib-
ited in games at Rome in 104 bce.

26'. King of Mauretania, who was persuaded by Sulla to betray Jugurtha,
his son-in-law, to the Romans; he remained on cordial terms with Sulla after
the end of the Jugurthine War.

27. In 55 bce, when Pompey celebrated the opening of his new stone the-
ater in the Campus Martius. Seneca's ensuing protest against public slaughter
(13.6-7; cf. Letters 7.3-5, 95.33) is already anticipated by Cicero's report {Letters
to His Friends 7.1.3; cf. Pliny Natural History 8.21) that the crowd was moved to
compassion for the persecuted elephants.

28. After defeat at Pharsalus in 48 bce, Pompey sought protection from
Ptolemy XIII of Egypt, his cliens and possible ward; but while going ashore at
Alexandria he was murdered by Ptolemy's agent.

29. Magnus — "Great."

30. As in 13.3 above.

31. L. Caecilius Metellus, consul in 251 bce, triumphed after defeating
Hasdrubal at Panormus (Palermo) in 250; the exact number of elephants is
disputed.

32. At Rome the pomerium was the sacral boundary, plowed and then
marked by stone pillars, beyond which the city auspices (auspicia urbana) could
not be taken. Post-Sullan extensions are in fact attributed to Julius Caesar,
Augustus, and Claudius; but Seneca (or his informant) arguably presses the
point that Sulla was the last to extend the pomerium for legitimate reasons
{Italian territory acquired).

33. Twice according to Livy, in 494 bce and then in 449.

34. In their legendary contest to become Rome's founder, Remus was de-
feated when, taking auspices on the Aventine, he counted six birds, Romulus
on the Palatine twelve.

35. If Socrates effectively founded the skeptical Academy (cf. Cicero Tuscu-
lan Disputations 5. 11), Arcesilaus (316/15-242/1 bce) was founder of the second
or Middle Academy, and Carneades of Cyrene (214-129 bce) the third or
New Academy.

36. While the Stoic strives to be free of the passions (apathes), Stoic ap-
atheia did not connote complete impassivity (cf. On Anger 1.16.7). But the



more extreme Cynic position casts the sage as completely detached, even
z/rcemotional.

37. The nomenclator, or guest-announcer, discreetly attends his master.

38. Cf. 7.3 and n. 12 above.

39. During his visit to Alcmena, wife of Amphitryon and mother of
Hercules.

40. Xerxes, on his campaign against Greece in 480 bce; cf. Herodotus
7.45-46.

41. Most obviously, at sea at Salamis in 480 bce, on land at Thermopylae
in 480 and Plataea in 479.

42. Gaius Marius won election to the consulship in 107 bce. After Jugurtha's
defeat, he was elected again in 104, and four more times down to 100, and then
again in 86. The full impact of the allusion here lies not just in Marius's rapid
transition from soldier to statesman but implicitly also in the sheer number
of his consulships, offering their own illustration of how "new preoccupations
take the place of old" (17.5).

43. According to tradition L. Quintius Cincinnatus was appointed dictator
in 458 bce (after defeating the Aequi in fifteen days, he laid down his office),
and again in 439. The legend that he was called from the plow is usually
associated with his first dictatorship, but by linking it with the second and
overlooking the distance between 458 and 439 Seneca stresses Cincinnati's
restlessness ex officio.

44. P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus (235-183 bce), appointed at age twenty-
six to the command against Carthage in the Second Punic War. Resentment
at his successes may have fueled the accusations of financial dishonesty leveled
in the so-called trials of the Scipios of the 180s; embittered, he withdrew to
Liternum on the Campanian coast, where he died in 184/83.

45. As legate serving under his brother, Scipio negotiated peace terms after
the defeat in 189 bce of Antiochus III, king of Syria, at Magnesia.

46. Gaius was assassinated on January 22 or 24 in 41 ce. Seneca conflates
events by connecting a food crisis in 41 with Gaius's notorious construction of
a bridge of boats from Baiae to Puteoli in 39. Gaius allegedly sought to emulate
Xerxes' bridging of the Hellespont in 480 bce.

47. I.e., clients rise early to pay their patron the formal morning call (salu-
tation cf. 14.4), then escort him in public; the client-patron relationship also
dictated political and social allegiances.

48. The consules ordinarii ("normally appointed" consuls, as opposed to suf-
fecti y or "replacement" consuls), after whom the year of their office was dated.

49. According to Tacitus (Annals 1.7.2, n.35.1), Gaius Turannius wzsprae-
fectus annonae in 14 ce (hence naturally an example of special relevance to
Paulinus) and, still in office, close to Claudius in 48. If, as Seneca has it, he
was past ninety before the end of Gaius's reign in 41, it hardly seems likely



that he would still be in office some seven years later. Hence the case for read-
ing S[extus] with the Senecan MS tradition, and for positing another elderly
Turannius apart from the impossibly old Gaius — unless Seneca simply exag-
gerates his age before 41 ce.

50. To avoid attention, the funerals of children were conducted at night by 
torchlight and taper.
