Models
Attract Women Through Honesty
By Mark Manson
Copyright © Mark Manson, 2011-2013. All Rights Reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
mechanical or electronic, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage
and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Requests for permission for or further information on usage of this document should be
addressed to: mark@postmasculine.com
Legal Notice
The Purchaser or Reader of this publication assumes responsibility for the use of these
materials and information.Adherence to all applicable laws and regulations, federal, state, and
local, or any other jurisdiction is the sole responsibility of the Purchaser or Reader.
The Author and Publisher assume no responsibility or liability whatsoever on the behalf of any
Purchaser or Reader of these materials.
Any perceived slights of specific people or organizations are unintentional.
Table of Contents
Introduction: Movement 8
Part I: Reality
Chapter 1: What Attracts Women 17
The Ubiquity of Status 20
Desire to Be Desired 22
Chapter 2: True Confidence 25
The Seduction Process 30
False Confidence and Compensation 37
Chapter 3: Power in Vulnerability 43
The Pain Period 47
The Investment Paradox 58
Chapter 4: The Gift of Truth 62
The Truth Is Always Shining Through 66
Unconditionality 68
Setting Boundaries 72
Finding Your Truth 75
Friction and Projection 79
Part II: Strategy
Chapter 5: Polarization 86
The Three Categories of Women 87
Strategies for Each Category 92
Polarizing to Attract 99
Chapter 6: Rejection and Success 103 It’s Usually Not About You 106 Men Who Only
Experience Rejection 108 Redefining Success 110
Chapter 7: The Three Fundamentals 114
Natural Advantages/Disadvantages 117
Two Types of Men 118
Part III: Honest Living
Chapter 8: Demographics 123
Lifestyle Choices 127
Beliefs and Self-Selection 130
Age, Money and Looks 136
Race and the Foreigner Effect 139
Social Proof 142
The Most Beautiful Women 144
Being Something Versus Saying Something 149
Chapter 9: How to Be Attractive 152
Fashion and Fitness 153
Body Language 161
Vocal Tonality 163
How to Be a Fascinating Person 164
Bringing It All Together 175
Part IV: Honest Action
Chapter 10: What Are Your Stories? 179
Defense Mechanisms 184
You Are Not a Victim 189
Sexual Motivation 193
Chapter 11: How to Overcome Anxiety 196
The Guide to Overcoming Your Anxieties 199
Courage and Boldness 206
Part V: Honest Communication
Chapter 12: Your Intentions 211
Creepiness 214
Sexual Tension 216
Developing an Emotional Connection 219
Building and Breaking Habits 223
Chapter 13: How to Be Charming 225
First Impressions 226
Conversation Skills 229
Humor 240
Chapter 14: The Dating Process 247
Phone Numbers 248
The Perfect Date 253
Signals Women Give 258
Chapter 15: Physicality and Sex 261
Kissing 264
Escalating 266
Sex 272
Closing
Conclusion: Moving Ahead 280
Epilogue: What if it Was a Gift? 284
Glossary 287
Further Reading 294
About the Author 296
Introduction: Movement
I n our post-industrial, post-feminist world, we lack a clear model of what an attractive man is.
Centuries ago, a man’s role and duty was power and protection. Decades ago, it was to
provide. But now? We’re not quite sure. We are either the first or second generation of men to
grow up without a clear definition of what our social roles are supposed to be, and without a
model of what it is to be strong and attractive men.
This book’s goal is to provide that model, to provide a model of what being an attractive,
integrated man looks like in the 21
st century. That means going on the past standards of
protector and provider, of strength and stoicism, and improving ourselves into something
bigger and better, something sexier and more attractive.
Seven years ago, when I first began helping men improve their relationships with women, I had
no idea the rabbit hole of information and self-development I was about to go down, both for
myself and for others.At the time the primary concerns of my dating life revolved around which
drink specials were going on that Tuesday night and which one of the five Jennas in my phone
was the one I met last weekend.
It wasn’t until I sat down and tried to get other men to the point where they had five Jennas in
their phone that I had a glimpse of how deep a man’s emotional and sexual development
actually goes, and how difficult it is to inspire a genuine movement.
I won’t lie, in hindsight, getting myself to that point seems easy now by comparison. Growing
up, I had always been somewhat of an average guy, although I had little luck with the ladies.
Then in 2005, after being cheated on and left by my first serious love and first serious girlfriend,
I was emotionally distraught and slightly traumatized. I became obsessive. A desperate need
for validation and affection from women arose within me and I spent an inordinate amount of
time pursuing that validation and affection, far more than most men ever do. I overcompensated
and soon became driven to sleep with every girl in the Boston area who would
let me anywhere near her.
This went on for a little more than two years.
My plan wasn’t sophisticated. Really, I read a couple books with pick up lines and techniques
and went out to bars 4-5 nights a week — approaching, flirting and failing, pushing and pulling,
fucking and floundering for those 30 glorious months of experimentation.
It was self-indulgent.But it was a time of growth and a time of movement.
But a couple of years and a few dozen women later, two things happened. First, I began to
realize that rampant drunken sex was fun, but not very fulfilling.And it wasn’t exactly affecting
the other areas of my life in a healthy manner. I was required to let up and evaluate myself, to
question why I was sacrificing so much time and effort for superficial pleasures.
The second thing that happened was I grew a reputation locally for my exploits. Soon men
whom I had never met were emailing me asking if they could come hang out with me, to see
how I interacted with women, to watch me in action. It was weird at first. But then I decided,
sure, why not, just buy my drinks or pay me a bit on the side.
And strangely, I feel like that’s where the real journey began. To try and model the internal
movement that had been occurring within myself and then replicate it in other men.
They say if you want to master something, teach it.And this second journey actually ended up
being far more educational than the first. When I went out for myself, it was easy. Half the time
I was going out to lose myself, to bury my emotions and hopefully wake up in the arms of a
stranger.Sometimes it worked.And that’s really all I knew.
But this second journey had a purpose, had a meaning, and I found myself in need of an
intellectual foundation. I couldn’t just do it, I had to teach it, explain it, and impart it unto others
and then get them to do it.
This led me in a winding, twisted path. It began with entries into and exits out of the so-called
“Pick Up Artist” community. I researched social psychology, theories behind attraction,
historiographies on human sexuality, went on strip club binges, read books on NLP and
cognitive therapy, attended various self-help seminars and taught a few myself, shared hotel
rooms with runway models, experimented with touch-healing and had a few alternative
therapy mishaps, engaged in gender arguments with feminists, and read every crappy dating
book on the market.
As I learned and grew, the coaching grew. What began as a sideshow hobby turned into a
business, a full-time business at that. It soon took me to more than two dozen cities across
America, then to countries in Europe, to England and Australia, and I even took field trips as far
as Argentina, Brazil, Russia, Israel and Thailand, where I discovered that much of what I had
previously assumed about women was merely cultural, not universal.
It was a period of immense education and drive, where I made a clear point to not let my
thinking be confined by any previous model or paradigm about masculinity or male/female
sexuality.
After all of that, over six enriching and challenging years, this is what I’ve come back with:
There are two movements occurring right now.
The first one is a greater social and emotional movement in western culture. There’s a call for a
new masculinity that’s been lacking for generations now. There’s been a void of what men are,
what they’re supposed to be, how they’re supposed to behave, and until now no one has
moved to fill that void.
Call it over-ambitious, but this book aims to begin fill that void, to help create the future models
of masculine behavior: models to be attractive, powerful and in control of your relationships
with women and with your life in general.
The second movement is happening within you personally. It’s an emotional movement. You’re
reading this because you want to change. You want to change your interactions and
relationships with the women in your life. You want these relationships to improve. You want
these relationships to be abundant. You want to feel confident and empowered around
women, those you know and those you don’t know but want to meet. You want to feel in
control of your relationships with them. You want to be sexual with women without shame or
hesitation or regret or pain.
This second movement is an internal movement. It took me a long time to come to grips with
that.Although this second movement often begins by changing outer behavior and results in a
change of outer behavior, the process itself is an internal one, a shift of emotional disposition,
which is then reflected in one’s social and romantic life.
When you change your beliefs and mindsets, the behavior follows.
This book is designed to guide you through that internal movement. The larger social
movement is merely a backdrop, and is only briefly explained to give context to your current
situation. Your failures with women aren’t caused because you say the wrong thing or look like
the wrong guy. Words and appearances are merely a symptom of a greater problem.
Your failures happen because you grew up emotionally ill-equipped to deal with women and
intimacy. The words you say and looks you have are merely a side-effect of that.
This isn’t just about intellectually understanding how to stand, how to talk, how to behave.
This isn’t “faking it until you make it.” It’s deeper than that. This is about intellectually learning
the behaviors that will cause your emotions to shift, which will then lead to permanent and
unconscious changes to transform you into the attractive male you can be.
This is that how-to guide.
This book aims to arm you with the behaviors that will form that emotional foundation you
never received in adolescence, to present the masculine model you and I missed out on.
And once you begin this internal shift, you’ll find that the social actions — saying the right
thing, knowing when to go for the kiss, knowing how to approach a woman, etc. — they will all
begin to fall into place, and fall into place in a more profound and powerful way than simply
memorizing some lines or following some sort of arbitrary procedure.
The beginning of this book is very theoretical. It’s the big picture stuff. I do this because I think
it’s important to lay a foundation to explain the realities of attraction, gender behavior, and
what determines your value on the dating market as a man. As the book goes on though, it
becomes more technical and specific, slowly honing in on necessary actions and habits. I
believe it’s important to explain why you should do certain actions and behaviors before asking
you to do them.
Part I is an honest look at female attraction based on scientific research, and the realistic
consequences of that research in modern life.
Part II is an overview of the dating strategy that I recommend to all men who come to me for
help. The strategy focuses on polarizing reactions from women to screen for the ones most
receptive to your identity as soon as possible. We also address rejection how to use it to your
advantage rather than let it hinder you.
This is a reality-based strategy, not based on fantasies or the frivolities of wanting to sleep
with every woman you meet or dating a “perfect 10” by coming up with scripts of pick up lines.
These desires are rooted in insecurity and should stay where they belong: in your dreams.
Rather, Part II is a long-term strategy built to take a man from “no women in my life” to “lots of
amazing women in my life” as quickly as possible, with as little effort as possible.
Part III is the first part of our strategy and covers the first of the Three Fundamentals laid out in
Chapter 7, building an enjoyable lifestyle and becoming an attractive man. The steps laid out in
this part will be specific but will be long-term goals with long-term benefits.
Part IV covers developing courage and becoming a man of action. Men are expected to initiate
in all phases of courtship (the reasons why are explained in Part I), and therefore a man who is
hesitant, anxious or afraid of initiating will not get very far with most women. The advice laid
out in this step will require diligence but provide real and lasting change to those willing to
dedicate themselves. These steps are medium-term goals with medium-term benefits.
Finally, Part V will cover the nuts and bolts of communicating more effectively, more
attractively, more openly, and more sexually. The steps laid out in this section should have
immediate, short-term benefits.
My goal is to provide you with both in-depth perspective into your emotions and how you
operate, while also giving you practical processes for improving yourself and achieving your
goals.
If you’re looking for a book full of “say this line and then execute touch-plan X4Z-3,” then
you’re going to be disappointed. But not only are you going to be disappointed with this book,
you’re going to be disappointed with every book that gives advice like that. Because they are
band-aid solutions.
Until you learn to trust your own actions and learn to pursue women with your own unique style
and personality, you have learned absolutely nothing.
This book aims to give you your first real education on women and attraction, the education
you should have received a long time ago, from a number of sources, but never did.
And I’ll give you a free preview: it has little to nothing to do with what you’re saying. It has
everything to do with body, expression, emotion and movement.
A couple years ago I was in Argentina. There I made one of the most important discoveries in
all of my time doing this. I saw a girl at a club sitting by herself. She looked upset. And when I
approached her, she didn’t get any happier. She didn’t speak English and I barely spoke any
Spanish at the time. She didn’t want to dance and didn’t want to talk to me. She kept shaking
her head and motioning for me to go away. But I persisted. Eventually I got her to dance, and
then to smile.And what I discovered over the next week was how unnecessary words actually
are when it comes to seduction.
As she and I danced, we touched and played. I played hand games with her, twirled her, made
funny faces and communicated with fake sign language. I held her, caressed her and touched
her hair. We drew pictures on napkins for each other. When I put my arm around her and she
leaned into me it spoke more than 1,000 conversations. We moved and as that movement
drove us closer together physically, we came together emotionally until they were one and the
same and we came.
Emerson once wrote, “What you do speaks so loudly I cannot hear what you say.” Seduction is
an interplay of emotions. Your movement or lack of movement reflects and alters emotions,
not the words. Words are the side-effect. Sex is the side-effect. The game is emotions,
emotions through movement. If you learn anything from this book, let that be it.
Our culture has become stationary. We spend our time sitting behind desks, behind screens
and in cars. We don’t move like we used to and we don’t feel like we used to.
Over the course of this book, I’ll invite you and hopefully inspire you to move. To get up out of
that chair, to go outside, to dare to feel, to experiment and to connect. This will involve getting
off your ass, but that’s a good thing.And I will help you with that.And if you promise to move,
then I promise change. Slowly, your looks will change, your words will change, and your actions
will change.And hopefully, maybe something amazing will happen. Your emotions will shift and
move and vibrate and with them the women of the world will feel your resonance and come
calling.
Part I: Reality
Chapter 1: What Attracts Women
“The great question that has never been answered, and which I have not yet been able to
answer, despite my thirty years of research into the feminine soul, is ‘What do women want?’”
- Sigmund Freud
There is still no clear-cut definition or model of what drives female attraction yet.
That’s the truth.
All I can do here is give you my best theory based on the current research, as well as my
wealth of experience and explain what has consistently worked for me the world over.Anyone
who claims that they have the definitive answer to what drives and motivates female
attraction and sexual arousal is lying to you. The jury is still out. Psychologists, sexologists and
biologists have been studying it for over a century, and there’s still not a clear answer, not to
mention continued debate within academia as well as the dating advice industry.
This much is clear: female attraction does not operate like male attraction. Male attraction is
pretty straight-forward: visually-based, focused on physical features and more or less universal.
A beautiful girl in California is almost always beautiful in New York, Tokyo, New Delhi,Beirut and
Oslo. The variability between how attractive most men perceive her to be is not going to shift
much. A physically attractive woman is a physically attractive women, and biologically, almost
all straight men will respond in a predictable manner.
This is not true for women, not even close. In fact, women and what attracts and arouses them
can be maddeningly unpredictable, contradictory and whimsical. Researchers at the University
of Texas at Austin recently published a book called Why Women Have Sex where they
uncovered 234 separate reasons women will have sex with a man. This was based upon
thousands of surveys and statistical data over the course of years.
A vivid experience drove this unpredictability home for me a few years ago. I was in a club in
Boston approaching a number of women.At the beginning of the night I approached a group of
girls who were not very impressed by me. So I stepped up my jokes to try to elicit more of an
emotional response out of them. It worked. One of them looked me dead in the eye and said,
“You are the creepiest guy in here. Give it up.”
Ouch.
Not an hour later I was talking to another group of girls in another part of the club. They were
enrapt by some story I was telling, laughing at my jokes, beaming smiles. One of the girls took
me by the arm and said, “You are the hottest guy, you know you could have any girl in here,
right?”
Same club. Same night. Same guy. Same sense of humor. Same stories. And chances are,
similar girls. Completely opposite responses.
The first difficulty in understanding female sexual attraction is that women can become
attracted and aroused both physically and/or psychologically. This split between physical and
psychological arousal is unique to women as men are sexually aroused and stimulated primarily
physically. This split in sources of arousal makes it hard to perform controlled experiments and
therefore test different factors that may influence how a woman feels.
For instance, you may be able to show 200 women pictures of big burly men and ask them how
attracted they are to them. But you aren’t able to control their predisposed belief about
physically powerful men, the extent of their desire to be dominated, the sexual mores in which
they were raised, their sexual histories with burly men, their emotional states at that very
moment, their ovulation cycles, when the last time they had sex was, whether they just had a
fight with their boyfriend, etc.And even if you were able to control such things, they’re so fluid
and subjective that you can’t measure them.
Men on the other hand, according to research, with a few exceptions, always like a certain hipto-waist
ratio, always like youthful features, always like clear skin and shiny hair, and like them
under any circumstances. This is regardless of age, ethnicity, culture, or psychological
disposition. The variance in male preference for physical features is small. In women it can be
quite large.
This isn’t to say that physical attributes don’t factor into what women find attractive, it’s just
not as clear-cut as it is for men.
The second difficulty in understanding female attraction and arousal is that research indicates
that many women themselves are unaware of when they’re aroused or not.
In one experiment, a researcher measured bio-readings of blood flow in women’s vaginas as
they watched various film clips. During the film clips, the women were asked to indicate how
sexually aroused they were by the clip. Not only did the bio-readings return no discernible
patterns of arousal across the film clips (everything from conventional porn, to kink films, to
male-on-male homosexual sex, to innocuous nature clips to films of chimpanzees mating), but
the women themselves were often oblivious to their own arousal levels. For example, straight
women often completely misjudged their arousal by homosexual sex, and homosexual women
were unaware of their arousal by straight sex. And that’s not even to mention the chimps
mating.
The primary researcher (a woman) entered the experiment hoping to draw conclusions about
what women prefer sexually. Not only did she come to no conclusions, but she lamented in the
paper that the experiment only created more questions about female sexuality than it began
with.
In a nutshell, many women don’t even know what they want.But hey, I could have told her that.
But despite these setbacks, the scientific study of female sexuality has actually been taking
off in the past couple decades and they are making some headway. I don’t aim to make this
into an academic book, so I’m going to briefly summarize what I find to be the most important
points for our intents and purposes. If you’re really into the academic side of things, then check
out the Further Reading section at the end of the book.
The Ubiquity of Status
In surveys among literally tens of thousands of women, across all cultures, ethnicities, age
groups, and socio-economic standing, and even time periods, there’s one universal quality in
men that they all find desirable: perceived social status.
Whether this desire for men of higher status is biological or cultural, I’m not going to get into
here. For now, let’s just accept that this is the cross-cultural norm of how women judge
attractiveness.
The amount in which they desire it varies from culture to culture and from age group to age
group, and from individual to individual, but the desire for it is universal. Women want men who
are more successful, popular and powerful than they are. This is clear.
Where it becomes unclear and where my personal experience and perspective diverges from
the current evolutionary science is how women perceive power and status. I believe the
perception of status and power is quite relative and culturally constructed.
If you look at much of the research, it focuses on wealth and resources. This makes sense for a
few reasons: it’s easy to measure, it’s easy to point to, and it fits into a lot of pre-conceived
notions and stereotypes of what women are attracted to.
But if it were that simple, women would want to hear about your tax returns and car payments
on dates, not where you grew up, what you’re passionate about and all of the other sappy
things they love to hear you talk about.
The fact of the matter is, I’ve personally worked with too many wealthy and successful men
who couldn’t land a date to save their lives to believe that material wealth provides that much
of an advantage, or that it’s the end-all-be-all of attraction. Because take it from me, it
obviously isn’t.
If you think about it, the evolutionary perspective of status and wealth is in a bit of a
conundrum. Because for women to evolve a preference in men with resources and wealth,
then there would have had to been an overt way of distinguishing wealth and resources
among huntergatherer societies for millennia. And frankly, there wasn’t. Again, without boring
you to death with the anthropological details, cave men were not walking around with bank
statements and did not have houses or swimming pools to show off.At best, they had a little
bit more meat and food than the next guy. That’s not much to go on.
Also, anthropological data points to men and women being relatively equal in wealth and social
status for the majority of human history. Material wealth is a relatively modern invention.
Therefore, one would imagine a woman would judge status and reproductive fitness in another
way.
That’s why I believe that women don’t distinguish social status or being an “alpha male”
through material possessions — otherwise every guy flashing his expensive watch at the bar
would be getting laid (and trust me, they’re not) — but rather women judge it by behavior, as
behavior is all they had to go on in the caveman days, and therefore, throughout the majority
of human evolution.
Other research backs this up as well. Studies show that women are equally attracted to men
that they believe have the potential to be extremely successful as they are to men who are
already successful. This would also explain why women find men who display great strength
and skills to be attractive, even if they’re dirt poor. It explains why the starving artist has no
trouble finding girlfriends to support him, and the college athlete can date supermodels even
though he can’t afford a hamburger.
As a man, you don’t have to actually be rich and famous, you just have to show a lot of
potential for being rich and famous to be considered extremely attractive.
Or display the behaviors that imply being rich and famous.
I put forth that women judge social status by behavior.
Social status (and therefore attractiveness) is determined by how you behave around
other people, how other people behave around you, and how you treat yourself.
These are the three tenets of being a high-status and a highly attractive man: treat others
well, be treated well by others, and treat yourself well. Later, we’ll see that these loosely make
up the Three Fundamentals that much of this book is based on.
The other problem with the classical view of status and resources is that the perception of
social status depends completely on each woman’s values and belief systems.
For instance, wearing an expensive suit and talking about your Rolex watch will gain you eye-
rolls in many nice lounges around the US. But if you go to a small, poor village in the third world,
it will be all you need. The reason is that flaunting material wealth is seen as a major status
statement in much of the developing world, whereas in the United States it comes off to most
women as try-hard and insecure.
We’ll delve into how values and beliefs filter attraction later in the book. But the point to take
here is that social status is not fixed, it’s relative. It’s about perception, not reality. And it’s
determined by behavior, not assets. Just as I experienced in the nightclub in Boston that night
years ago, one woman can find you supremely attractive while the woman next to her can find
you supremely cheesy.
Desire to Be Desired
The other common denominator of female attraction has more to do with sexual arousal rather
than general attraction. It’s the desire to be desired. Or at least that’s how the theory currently
goes.
If status or perception of status affects a woman’s psychological arousal, then it’s this desire
to be pursued that ignites her physical arousal.
Again, I’m not here to posit whether this form of sexual arousal is biological or cultural.And of
course, there are many exceptions. But research shows that this is a common denominator in
female arousal, and my experience more than backs it up.
For a long time there was a lot of confusion as to what turned a woman on. Random events
and actions could have the same effect on her sexually, and there seemed to be no
connection.Again, with men it tends to be more consistent.
But with women, once again, it’s quite different. Often these same sexual and physical
behaviors turn her off as much as arouse her. Why does a man who rips her bra off and hold
her against a wall turn her on while a man who fumbles with the clasp and asks for her
permission to touch her nipples turn her off?
It had long been thought that female arousal was tied to ideas and display of security,
investment and commitment, particularly from high status men. Unfortunately for
psychologists, women don’t light candles and lay in their bathtubs masturbating to a mortgage
and white picket fence. They fantasize about far different (and stranger) things.
The new conclusion is that female arousal is somewhat narcissistic in nature. Women are
turned on by being wanted, by being desired.
(Note: Men are as well, although since female arousal is affected more by psychological stimuli
than physical stimuli on average, this is far more important for female arousal.)
Seemingly disconnected events that arouse women — a romantic marriage proposal in one
instance, and a rape fantasy in another — make sense. Both indicate an extreme desire in her
by a man.A man who’s willing to sacrifice everything to be with her. One is sacrificing his sexual
freedom, the other is risking his actual freedom... for her.All for her. This is hot.
When women say that just because they have rape fantasies doesn’t mean they want to be
raped, this is what they mean. What they want is to be desired. An unhinged desire. A
passionate and uncontrollable desire. They want to be desired to the point that a man
completely loses awareness and self-control. The actual rape part I’m sure none of them would
actually enjoy.
My experience supports this as well. It has slowly been discovered over the past five years or
so within the men’s dating advice industry, that the more physical assertiveness you pursue a
woman with, the more aroused she becomes — sometimes even if she wasn’t interested in
you to begin with. Your bold and aggressive pursuit of her often turns her on to the point
where she comes around and wants to get to know you.
For instance, I discovered that if you took a guy who used to just stand and chat with a girl and
had him put his arm around her and then chat to her, even though many women would reject
his physical advance, many of them would also become aroused.
It’s important to relate this back to the original dichotomy of female attraction and arousal
mentioned earlier in the chapter. Status attracts women, but by itself, it only attracts them in a
way that they want to be your girlfriend, not jump your bones. It’s a psychological, long-term,
identity-level attraction.
On the other hand, being physically assertive and sexually forthright triggers a woman’s sexual
arousal and makes her want to have sex, often right then and there, and often even if she
rejects your advances two or three or ten times.
This is why being wealthy and successful can actually be counterproductive if you’re just trying
to get laid. When I began to become financially successful and travel the world quite a bit, I
found that the more I focused on my business and financial success with women I met, the
more quickly they would want to get into a relationship with me. Whereas years prior, when I
had been broke and living on my friend’s couch, women just wanted to have sex with me.
Wealth and status will always present you with more opportunities than you had before. But
ultimately, if you want to become intimate and sexual with women, you’re going to have to
learn to convey your desire for her.And convey it clearly.
But this raises a bit of a paradox. It is the problem that every man faces when he tries to
seduce a woman. How do you show her that you want her, while still remaining high status?
Wouldn’t a man of high status have these women come to him and not the other way around?
The paradox is that if a high status man pursues a woman he makes himself low status and
therefore unattractive. But if a man never pursues women, then he never turns them on and
therefore never gets laid. It’s lose-lose.So what’s a man to do?
Chapter 2: True Confidence
“We are not held back by the love we did not receive in the past; but by the love we do not
extend in the present.”
- Marianne Williamson
H ow attractive a man is proportional to his confidence. The more confident he is, the more
attractive he will be, regardless of situation. The less confidence he has, the less attractive he
will be.
There are true forms of confidence and false forms of confidence. Most people practice False
Confidence. False Confidence is trying to impress others, being domineering and intimidating,
showing off, overcompensating, seeking attention and validation, or performing instead of
actually being.
True Confidence is the comfort in the knowledge that you’re a valuable and respectable man
whether other people recognize it or not. True Confidence is expressing your ideas and values
and interests without shame or inhibition.
True Confidence is sexy and irresistible. False Confidence is complicating and creates more
suffering.
Women don’t judge a man’s status by the car he drives or how many VIP tables he buys. They
judge it by his behavior, and the behavioral trait they pick up on is confidence, True Confidence.
True Confidence infiltrates all behaviors. The lack of True Confidence also infiltrates all
behaviors. It defines and resonates in everything you say and do, the way you stand, the way
you smile, the people you associate with, the car you drive, the wine you drink, the jacket you
wear.
Confidence itself isn’t new in relationship advice or social dynamics. It’s kind of a catch-all term
to signify everything that makes someone sure of themselves. Its meaning is murky and most
people don’t really know how to describe it unless they see it.
Women, in particular, are notorious for doling out the banal advice, “Just be confident,” as if
that actually meant something.
But here I will be clear in my definition of True Confidence: being less invested in other people’s
perceptions of you than your perception of yourself. Let me say that again:
True Confidence is being less invested in other people’s perceptions of you than in your
perception of yourself.
A lack of True Confidence causes you to chronically seek validation and approval from others
since you don’t give it to yourself. The way to build True Confidence is to invest more in
oneself.
Women are generally only attracted to men who are less invested in them than they are in
themselves.
B y investment I mean the degree to which you sacrifice/alter your own
thoughts/feelings/motivations for someone else. By less I mean that as a man, you should
sacrifice your thoughts/feelings/motivations for a woman less than she is willing to do for you.
That may sound cold, un-PC, and yes, it made me squirm a little bit when I first realized it. But
it’s true.
As humans, we’re wired to be drawn to people who value their selfperception more than our
perception of them. Think of the most confident people you know and you’ll see it’s true.
Think about it, for the majority of human history, men had few material possessions for women
to judge their status by. Therefore women watched men’s behavior.Ask yourself what kind of
behavior would indicate to a woman that a man is high status and fit to raise her children?
These are the men who would be sexually selected over the course of hundreds of thousands
of years.
Would it be a man who defers to all of the other men around him, who begs the women to be
with him, who can’t stand up for himself and whose emotions are dictated by those around
him? Or would it be the man who does what he wants, is unfazed by the threats others may
pose to him and who shrugs if he pursues a woman and she has no interest in him?
The second man indicates a man of status. If you’re at the top of the food chain, you have no
reason to be inhibited or to defer to others (unless you want to). If you’re at the bottom of the
food chain, your entire life will revolve around the deferring to others.
The high status man displays True Confidence. The low status man displays little of it.
True Confidence is not consciously calculated by women, or people in general. I guarantee you
will not see women walking around with confidence scorecards any time soon.
Confidence is felt. It’s intuited by women. It’s instinctual. Women unconsciously detect it by
watching a man’s behavior carefully. It’s why women can often become turned off at the most
innocuous moment or by the most unimportant statement. Consciously, the action or
statement may seem harmless, but unconsciously, it conveyed everything they need to know
about your status: by your lack of confidence.
As you are probably aware, women can be unconfident as well. And although a lack of
confidence is a turn-off for most men, it’s not as influential as it is for most women.
To most women, a man with True Confidence is like a woman with perfect tits and a
gorgeously sculpted ass. To a woman, a man with no confidence is like having the worst
breath and missing teeth.
Ideally, two emotionally healthy individuals will begin a relationship both with low investments in
one another and they will steadily let the investment deepen as the relationship grows. In a
healthy relationship, the gap in investment between the two parties would never grow too far
apart and both man and woman should never let their investment in the other person ever
surpass their investment in themselves.
This should not be mistaken for NOT being invested in the other person. If a man is attracted
to a woman, then he should be affected by her – that’s why he’s with her, after all – but never
more than she is by him. The minute he lets her dominate him emotionally, he demonstrates a
lack of True Confidence and a lack of status. He’s no longer dependable. He loses his ability to
make her feel secure.And his attractiveness slowly slips out the window.
But let’s put this into concrete,real-world terms. Here are a couple examples.
Jim is a nice guy. But he tends to be needy in his relationships and has what we would call a
high level of investment with any woman that he meets.
Whenever he dates a woman, he will rearrange his entire schedule at her whim. He will buy her
gifts and spend most of his paycheck on the nicest dinners for her. He’ll forgo plans with his
guy friends and if the woman he dates gets angry, he’ll sit patiently and listen to her vent all of
her frustrations to him indefinitely. Even when he feels that she’s being irrational or treating
him unfairly, he won’t say anything because he doesn’t want her to be upset with him.
As a result, despite caring for him, Jim’s girlfriends rarely respect him. And sooner or later —
usually sooner — they dump him. When Jim gets dumped, he becomes distraught and
depressed. He’s often inconsolable and drinks too much. Usually he doesn’t feel better again
until he meets another woman and the entire cycle repeats itself.
Then there’s Jeff. Jeff has been successful with women for his entire life and has a very low
level of investment in them. Jeff enjoys going out with his friends and pays no attention to
whether the women around him approve of him or not. At times he annoys or offends some
girls, but since he’s not paying attention to what they think of him, it doesn’t bother him.
But other times girls become quite attracted to Jeff. When Jeff notices, if he finds them
attractive, he’ll take their number and ask them out. When he takes them out, he takes them
to the park down the street from his flat. He then sits there and chats with them for a while
and if he doesn’t like them, he’ll get up and leave. If he does like them, he might take them to
grab a beer with him. If at any point she decides she doesn’t like him and leaves, Jeff doesn’t
really mind. He figures that he wouldn’t have been happy with her anyway, so why change
himself to please her?
Jeff ends up sleeping with a lot of women. His phone is constantly ringing with texts from them,
but he only answers them when he feels like it. He’s never rude or nasty to them. But he only
makes time for the ones he genuinely enjoys spending time with. You could say Jeff is
benevolently selfish with the women in his life.
Jim has a high level of emotional investment in the women he meets and dates. He’s very
needy. He immediately enslaves what little of his identity he’s aware of to what he believes will
make women like him.
Jeff has a low level of investment. He’s content with his life and proud of who he is. He’s not
needy. If a woman doesn’t appreciate that, then he figures he’s better off without her.
Obviously, simply not caring what others think is not a cure-all for your women problems. It gets
more complicated than that.But for now, it’s important to lay this foundation.
Women, as if with a sixth sense, detect Jeff’s lower level of emotional investment because it
informs all of his decisions and behaviors. Jeff is a high self-esteem individual who takes care of
himself and is therefore able to be himself around others. Jim is not. Within moments of
speaking to Jeff, and often before even speaking to him, they sense that not only does he
have a strong sense of identity, but he’s unwilling to compromise that identity for her. This subcommunicates
his high status to them and elicits attraction. How Jeff communicates this will
be discussed later in the book.
But ask women and they will tell you that they can immediately tell if a man’s “got it,” or if he
doesn’t. They don’t know what “it” is, but they know if he has it or not. That “it” that they
intuitively know in their gut the second they see him walk, hear him talk, or look him in the eye
is his level of investment relative to her, and therefore his level of True Confidence.
If this all seems impractical so far, don’t worry. The majority of this book is based on how to get
“it” and how to convey “it” with women immediately,regardless of what you actually say or do.
The Seduction Process
Biologically, women have a lot more to lose than men when it comes to sex.As a result, they’ve
had incentives to (usually) be pickier in choosing their sexual partners. Men, on the other hand,
have historically had fewer repercussions for promiscuity and from a biological point of view,
even gain some advantages by being promiscuous.
Whether it’s biological or cultural or some mixture of both, the fact is that female sexual
attraction is based largely in feeling comfortable and secure in a man that she meets. Women
have evolved a sexuality that is more psychological than physical, and that psychological need
is rooted in the need for security and connection.
This is why status is based on behavior and not simply assets.A man who is rich in assets has
greater potential to make a woman feel secure and comfortable, but if his behavior implies that
he won’t, then she won’t be attracted to him.A physically fit man will imply greater fitness for
her children, but again, if his behavior implies he will be incapable or incompetent in raising
them, then she will not be attracted.
Because men value sex more than women at the beginning of a relationship, and sexual
opportunities are scarcer for men than women, women tend to be less invested and less
needy early in the interaction. When a man approaches her and induces her to become as
invested in him as he is in her, this is the process of seduction. Sex occurs as a natural sideeffect
of this process.
Seduction is the process by which a man induces a woman to become as invested in him as he
is in her.
A man who is highly invested and needy before sex indicates to a woman that he’s emotionally
unreliable. If he’s willing to bend his will and emotions to such an extent just to have sex with
her, then he’s indicating that he’s emotionally unreliable as a partner and therefore cannot fulfill
the needs for security and comfort her attraction mechanism is based upon.
Whereas a man who is non-needy around sex, who displays True Confidence, but still
demonstrates desire for the woman he’s with, makes her feel secure in the fact that he’s
choosing her from a place of control and security, not to fill some hole of validation.
But as you’ve probably noticed, we still haven’t addressed that pesky investment paradox.
When boy meets girl, there are two ways for the seduction process to occur: boy gives girl the
impression that he’s less invested in her than he is in himself, inducing seduction; or boy
demonstrates that he is actually less invested in her than he is in himself.
The first method (a man giving a false impression) occurs through performance. Most of the
dating advice out there for men (and women) is advice on how to perform better – how to
perform as a man of status would, how to perform as someone who is attractive would.
Sometimes it works, but usually only for short periods of time, and only with women who are
performing themselves.
The second method (a man demonstrating less investment) is a passive process that he does
within himself and that permeates every aspect of his behavior over the long term. There’s
nothing to learn or memorize. It only requires one to move his yardstick for success from
external goals (more dates, more sex) to internal goals (better relationships, more emotional
fulfillment, overall happiness). This is True Confidence and what the focus of this book is.
Traditionally, male dating advice has focused on either one strategy or the other. The first
method is populated by pick up tactics: lines, routines, gimmicks, and displays of value meant
to conjure up a sense that the woman is more invested in him than she actually is. The second
method is populated by generic advice on confidence and selfdevelopment or “inner game.”
Both methods work.Although performance is a short-term solution for external gains and True
Confidence is a long-term solution for internal growth.
But this is still all very theoretical. Let me take you through a few reallife examples of seduction
and look at the various factors going on in each one from a confidence/investment point of
view. These examples are real, but identities have been changed and minor details altered.
When Ryan was in college, he was a leading member of his fraternity. He was in charge of
organizing his house’s parties. He was a gregarious guy and liked by most people. At one of
these parties he met Jane. Jane took an immediate liking to Ryan and the two began dating.
Ryan would organize and throw his parties, Jane would come and bring her friends. They
shared stories, experiences and interests. The rest of college went on like this.
After they graduated, Ryan took a job at a bank. Jane got involved in a local charity. Ryan’s
social network disappeared and his long hours at work killed any desire for him to go out and
make new friends. He began to spend more and more time with Jane. They usually just
watched movies and shared a bottle of wine.
As time went on, Jane became more and more involved in her charity events and began
traveling to help with fundraisers. Ryan would spend this time alone watching TV or maybe
grabbing a beer with one of his old buddies, but it wasn’t the same. After another year, Ryan
would openly complain to Jane about her trips. Jane obviously sympathized with Ryan, but she
felt pressured and resented him for it. They began to fight more often. Ryan gained weight.
Jane spent more time working away from home.
Ryan decided to plan a lavish trip for the two of them to the Caribbean. He could use some
much-needed time away from work, and it would infuse their relationship with some
excitement and passion that it sorely needed. The trip returned the romance to the two briefly.
But upon returning home reality began to set in once again. Within a few months it was back
to business as usual: him overworked and irritable, her distancing herself and traveling.
Ryan began talking about marriage. Jane was hesitant. She stated that her job was getting
busier and she didn’t know how much she’d be around to plan a wedding. Ryan had been
saving much of his money to buy her a ring. Jane lamented that they were still young and
hadn’t really experienced much of life yet. Secretly, in the back of her mind, she couldn’t shake
the feeling that Ryan was terrified of just that: experiencing life, and marrying her was just
another way for him to escape it.
Dejected, a few weeks later Ryan began to complain that Jane spent too much time with her
friends and at work. Indeed, Jane had been staying at work until way into the night, even on
days when she didn’t have to. Ryan began pressuring Jane to move in together, but again she
resisted, this time fervently. Ryan exploded. He had been giving up everything for her the past
few years and she had been nothing but ungrateful. She retorted that Ryan had been
suffocating her with his demands for attention and affection. Jane dumped him on the spot.
There’s a good chance the above story sounds familiar to you. You or one of your friends or
family members have probably gone through the same process as Ryan: meet girl in a situation
of low emotional investment and low neediness, entered relationship with said girl, gradually
invested more and more while letting the rest of your personal life slip away, until girl leaves
you and dates some other guy who is less invested than she is again.
Here’s another story that may sound familiar to you, but is just as important.
Daniel is 24 years old and trying to get over a three-year dry spell. It’s the first time he’s
pursued women since his only girlfriend dumped him three years ago.
Daniel goes out to a bar one night and approaches Stacy. Daniel approaches her with what
seems like an innocuous question about drunk guys getting in fights. She responds and he
follows it up with a number of quirky lines to soon get her laughing.
These are lines and questions Daniel learned from reading a book on women. Daniel has been
practicing the tactics for a while and has recently become proficient at using them.After facing
countless rejections, he’s finally able to get girls’ phone numbers and even a few dates.
He continues to talk to Stacy throughout the night about pre-ordained topics he’s comfortable
with. He’s able to punctuate each lull with tried and tested jokes he’s used dozens of times.
Every time, Stacy laughs on cue. He touches her on the arm just like he read to do, and she
touches him back.She’s interested.
A week later, after some fun texting, Stacy meets up with Daniel for a date. Once again, Daniel
executes everything he’s learned: stick to topics about her passions, move her from venue to
venue, never sit across from her but next to her, use a planned excuse to get her back to his
place, and so on.
There are hiccups along the way, but it all more or less works. Stacy seems genuinely
attracted and when Daniel finally works up the nerve to kiss her, she kisses back
enthusiastically.
Daniel is ecstatic. He feels like months of hard work have finally paid off.
The second date goes similarly. Daniel manages to get Stacy back to his apartment where,
fumbling through his excitement, he has sex with her.
Daniel is on cloud nine, delirious with joy and drunk on validation. He jumps online to talk to his
best friend and tell him all of the clever lines he said and how much she likes him. Little does
Daniel realize that it wasn’t his lines and tricks that Stacy fell for, it was the endearing way he
laughed at himself whenever he was self-conscious. She thought it was cute and it reminded
her of her first boyfriend. She was in a lonely patch of her life and wanted to feel needed by
someone and the flattering of Daniel working so hard to get her to laugh won her over, at least
for the time being.
Daniel continues to go out and run his “game” but he’s always excited to see Stacy again.
They see each other a few more times over the following weeks, but something changes.
Since he’s already had sex with her, Daniel stops running his lines and tactics that he learned.
He slowly reverts back to his normal self, his unconfident self.
It begins subtly with him agreeing with everything she says, followed by a sudden inability to
come up with new and interesting topics of conversation. It turns out he spends most of his
time watching TV and playing video games, and there’s not a whole lot to talk about with that.
What used to be vibrant and hilarious bantering has now turned into Stacy showing up, saying
whatever she wants and Daniel more or less agreeing with her until it’s time to have sex, really
bad sex.
One day, Daniel texts Stacy about meeting up with him that weekend. She was busy studying
for a test that night and didn’t reply. Daniel begins to get insecure about why she’s not
responding. He gets online and asks his friend for advice. His friend says that he needs to text
her something really crazy to get her to pay attention to him again.
The next day, after her test,Stacy sees her phone and notices four new texts from Daniel. The
first one is casual, but each one gets progressively weirder and more nonsensical. Stacy is
turned off, but willing to overlook it and replies that she was busy taking a test but could see
Daniel that weekend.
But Daniel is not so easily fooled. He’s not about to reward Stacy’s bad behavior by
immediately hanging out with her. He’s hurt and he won’t let her manipulate him or fuck with
him again. So he waits a few hours and then texts Stacy that she’s too late and he’s already
made other plans with other people.She finds this strange and is annoyed since he had texted
her four times, but shrugs it off and goes on with her life.
The following week Daniel texts Stacy and coldly insinuates that he’s ready to see her now, if
she’s willing to work for it. The condescending and disrespectful tone pisses Stacy off and she
doesn’t respond.
Two days later Daniel, drunk and confused about why Stacy doesn’t want to see him anymore,
sends a sappy text saying that he really likes her and really wants to see her again and doesn’t
know why she doesn’t like him anymore.
Completely confused and turned off, Stacy replies that he’s a nice guy but she just wants to
be friends, even though she has no intention of ever seeing him again.
I can tell you that I’ve seen both of these stories play out over and over and over again, in
hundreds of different forms between hundreds of different people.
Guy meets girl. Guy shows less investment than girl than himself, sex and/or relationship
occurs, guy becomes more invested than girl than himself, sex stops and/or relationship falls
apart.
The first story is an example of why it’s important to continue to invest in oneself even as life
changes occur and the relationship goes on. It’s the only long-term solution to keep long-term
relationships stable and happy.
Ryan’s relationship with Jane failed because after he graduated from college he lost and never
regained the great aspects of his identity that made him so attractive to Jane in the first place
— his social network, his joy and spontaneity, the cool group activities he planned. As he got
cornered into a job he hated and lost his social circle, he began leaning on her more and more
to define his identity for himself. He invested less in himself and more and more in her.
Meanwhile, Jane flourished after graduation, quickly falling into a job she was passionate about
and good at. She made new friends and began traveling and having new experiences on her
own. As Jane became less invested in Ryan for her identity, Ryan became more invested in
Jane, growing needier and needier. Eventually the dynamic of investment shifted and the
relationship toppled over.
Daniel’s experience was different. Daniel’s story is a quintessential example of why pick up
lines, routines, value tactics and the like are only short-term solutions. Daniel was low
confidence and highly invested in Stacy’s affection from the start. All Daniel did was use
techniques and lines to trick Stacy into thinking he was far less needy and invested than he
actually was.
And it worked, for a bit. But the irony here is that what attracted her the most was not Daniel’s
lines, but the authenticity of him bumbling through them to impress her. Stacy found it
endearing and genuine and was in a needy place herself at the time. She was in a place in her
life where she wanted to feel needed and powerful. She also found the idiosyncrasies of his
personality to be cute, as they reminded her of her first boyfriend.So she slept with him.
But as Daniel’s lines and techniques ran out, the true level of investment became more and
more clear. Daniel’s behavior became erratic and it disgusted Stacy, causing her to cut him off
in some ugly text exchanges.
But a lot of men who follow this type of dating advice don’t even make it that far. They may
conjure the impression of status for only an hour, or even a few minutes before they falter.
Such are the stresses of performance.
Learning pick up techniques and lines without doing genuine identitylevel work in order to
permanently decrease your neediness ends up only being a band-aid solution. It provides a
short, temporary relief from an otherwise permanent problem. It causes more stress. And it
ultimately makes us feel worse about ourselves.
False Confidence and Compensation
When a man has spent his entire life being needy and highly invested, doing the legitimate
work to transform himself into a non-needy, attractive man is not easy. To develop True
Confidence, a man must develop self-respect, a healthy sense of boundaries, social
competence and healthy life habits. It’s often a painful long-term process that entails quite a
bit of introspection, questioning, doubt, anger, frustration, personal development, lifestyle
changes, and so on.
But there’s a small shortcut.And that shortcut is to objectify women.
See, as we’ve pointed out up until now, some men try to fake confidence through performance.
We’ve already seen how this ultimately fails in the long-run.
But other men compensate. Remember, attraction is based on highstatus behavior and highstatus
behavior is based on True Confidence. True Confidence is based on being more
invested in yourself than women. Well, some men solve this problem by simply not caring about
women at all, by treating them like shit. I call this False Confidence.
Men who have False Confidence act like they’re more important than anybody else, are
aggressive, insensitive and demanding.
When a woman becomes merely another conquest, a number, something to treat like a trophy
or a toy, it can be extremely easy to assert yourself around them, to prioritize your own values
and beliefs over theirs, to risk rejection around them, and dominate any perspectives they may
have — all attractive non-needy traits, merely expressed in horrible ways.
False Confidence is often promoted to men by other men growing up. False Confidence is built
on the idea of always being dominant or in control. It is a nebulous mixture of selfishness,
assertiveness and domination that is achieved not through investing higher in oneself, but by
tearing others down — belittling others’ ideas, imposing one's own desires and treating women
like sub-human objects that are to be possessed, not related to.
They see seduction and relationships as another competition to be dominated and won, not
as a collaboration to be enjoyed.And the sad thing is, it works… not on all women, not even on
most women, but on women who have no confidence, who expect to be treated like shit, and
who treat men like shit in return, it will work. Women with any confidence will pass up a man
with False Confidence in a heartbeat. She sees right through his macho veneer. But low
selfesteem women, particularly women with truckloads of emotional problems — particularly
the type of women getting drunk in night clubs regularly — will gladly subject themselves to
the abuse.
So yeah, being a False Confident works. But it leads to unpleasant, shallow and superficial
interactions, constant headaches dealing with women not calling you back regularly, women
regretting having sex with you, and emotionally unstable girls who bother you constantly. It’s
like swimming in the shallow end of the pool — yeah, you’re swimming, but it’s not nearly as
rewarding as the deep end… and there’s piss everywhere.
False Confidence comes in many varieties, but usually boils down to this: focus on your own
wants and desires to the point of imposing them onto others. Exaggerate your dominance and
boast of your strength.Accept no wrongdoing.Admit no faults.Blame others for your problems.
Go out of your way to make others feel smaller so that you appear bigger.
Most men learn this from other men with False Confidence, often from older men growing up.
The problem with False Confidence is that it defines itself by getting what it wants from
others.A man who is False Confident only feels confident if he’s dominating somebody else, if
someone else is giving him what he wants. And in that subtle way, he is therefore more
invested in others than he is in himself. He is therefore unattractive.
To give an example, if a man of True Confidence meets a woman who rejects him or is not
interested in him, he will assume it is her loss, that he is a great guy and that if she can’t see
that, then that is OK. Life will go on.
But when a man of False Confidence is rejected, he becomes angry and hurt. He feels inferior.
He looks for a way to either hide or prevent the rejection, or he’ll lash out in anger at the
woman for not giving him what he wants.
It’s just another form of performance – he acts as if he’s in control, but his desperation to be in
control is due to insecurity.A man of True Confidence doesn’t try to control but rather gives up
control. He understands that the world isn’t about him and that all he can control is himself and
his own actions. He’s not bothered when things don’t go his way or when people don’t
recognize him as being amazing because he already feels amazing himself. He doesn’t need
their approval and their disapproval doesn’t phase him from his mission.
Ultimately, despite a lot of chest-thumping bravado, men of False Confidence are
overcompensating. They’re insecure and desperate and attempt to cover it up by trying to be
superior to everybody else.
Men of False Confidence are often serial players: guys who obsessively seek out casual sex
and not only regard the women they sleep with poorly, but treat them poorly as well.
The purpose behind False Confidence is the same as the purpose behind performance: to gain
attention and affection from those around them. One man does it by faking his way to
attractive behavior, the other does it by being imposing and demanding. One tries to induce
love. The other tries to induce fear.Both are needy and unattractive.
Both will get laid.And they will get laid with women who are also performing and who also have
False Confidence, creating bad and unhealthy relationships.
Both personas are equally dependent on validation from women and people around them.Both
behavior sets derive from a fundamental insecurity: investing more in the perceptions of others
than your investment in yourself.
Let’s do another example:
Roy was a nice guy all through college. He was a geeky science guy, but adored by all of the
girls he hung out with. Roy adored them as well, but in a sexual way. Unfortunately, whenever
Roy worked up the nerve to say something, they always told him they just wanted to be his
friend. All the while Roy would sit there listening to his female friends complain about their
horrible and insensitive boyfriends.All Roy could think was, “But I care about you, I’m sensitive,
and I’m right in front of you. Why can’t you see that?”
Needless to say, Roy’s female friends never came around. Despite all of the waiting and hoping
and placating, they always moved on to the next guy — usually a guy they had just met.
Eventually, when Roy was 25 years old, he landed his first girlfriend: a depressive and slightly
overweight grad student who worked in his lab. Despite her obvious shortcomings, he was
smitten with her. But his girlfriend’s emotional instability eventually got the best of both of
them.After a turbulent year together, they broke up.
Roy’s anger boiled over. He was sick of being walked over and kicked around. He was sick of
being ignored and hurt. His entire life women had never paid attention to him sexually, and the
one who finally did wasn’t satisfied. Roy decided he had had enough, it was time to put himself
first. It was time to put his own needs first. He had seen how other men had been assholes to
his female friends and slept with them, so he decided that he would do the same.
Roy quickly found that he was comfortable dishing out insults and teases toward the women
he talked to. It felt like vindication for a lifetime of emotional negligence. Some women were
offended, but strangely this made Roy feel even more powerful and motivated him to go out
and meet even more.
Soon, to Roy’s surprise, some of these girls actually became attracted to him. He took them
home and slept with them.At first the girls were drunk and ugly, but slowly and surely, as Roy
became more comfortable in his new player persona, the girls became more attractive.
Some of the girls Roy slept with were genuinely intrigued by Roy and wanted to get to know
him better. Roy would toy with these women, play phone tag with them, use them for sex a
few more times and then invent some sort of conflict or blame her for something she didn’t do
as an excuse to not see her anymore. These women quickly got the picture that Roy was not
stable nor an enjoyable person to spend time with, so they moved on.
Other girls Roy slept with weren’t as intrigued with him as they were emotionally desperate for
some sort of male validation.
Some of these women simply wanted to be validated by having sex. In which case Roy fucked
them and never heard from them again. But for many others, their neediness was deeper than
that. These women desperately craved emotional validation as well as sexual validation. They
would launch into crying fits, call Roy dozens of times over the course of a night or show up at
his apartment unannounced. The sex was often incredible, but it was almost impossible for
Roy’s own anger and insecurities to not get sucked into the drama of these other women.
Dramatic episodes would go on for weeks or sometimes months in a cycle of angry break up
back to loving reunion back to angry break up, over and over again, each time getting more
intense. Many of these women had experienced sexual abuse in their past. Eventually Roy
would tire of their games and break things off permanently, swearing to never let himself
succumb to them like that again. But often the next “crazy” girl would be right around the
corner.
I always tell men, if every girl you date is unstable and crazy, that’s a reflection of your
emotional maturity. It’s a reflection of your confidence or lack of confidence. Confident people
don’t date unconfident people and vice-versa. Women who aren’t needy don’t date men who
are needy. They simply don’t have the patience or respect to do it.
If all of the women you attract are needy and emotionally helpless, what does that say about
you?
Roy went from having no confidence to overcompensating with False Confidence. He went
from worshipping women with no respect for himself to worshipping himself with no respect for
women. The key to True Confidence is to have both:respect for both oneself and for women.
False Confidence fails with anyone who has True Confidence. The reason is simple:A rich man
doesn’t need to prove to people he’s rich; a confident man doesn’t need to prove to people
he’s confident. And a guy who “doesn’t give a fuck” doesn’t need to go around telling people
he “doesn’t give a fuck.”
A true “alpha male” doesn’t need to assert his “alphaness” at every turn.
Conversely, a confident woman who doesn’t define herself by the man she dates, is not going
to have time for a guy who spends his time trying to impress her. The little bit of validation she
receives from it is not going to be worth putting up with the fact that she’s dealing with a guy
who is far needier than she is, and therefore she’s not going to have any attraction for him.
The only permanent way to attract and date more women and more attractive women is to
become more attractive yourself. And the way a man becomes more attractive himself is by
investing in himself.
Permanent change to one’s investment and neediness in one’s relationships with women is
hard and is a process that encompasses all facets of one’s life.But it’s a worthwhile journey.As
a man, it may be the most worthwhile journey.
And the key to it is probably something you wouldn’t expect. In fact, it’s something that most
men turn their nose up at when they hear it. The key is vulnerability.
Chapter 3: Power in Vulnerability
“I do not conquer; I submit.”
- Giacomo Casanova
When most men hear the word “vulnerability,” their immediate reaction is to associate it with
weakness. In general, men are raised to withhold their emotions, to not show weakness, and to
ignore any hint of introspection. On top of that, most of the popular dating advice out there
encourages guys to be aloof, stand-offish, judgmental and at times scathing towards women.
Men have a lot of negative assumptions about the idea of being more vulnerable and opening
up to their emotions. Chances are it makes you a little skeptical or queasy to even see me
writing about this.
Don’t worry, I’m not going to have you hold hands around a campfire with some wimpy support
group and cry about your spirit crystal or share stories about your power animal.
I want you to think of vulnerability in a more broad way. Not just emotional vulnerability
(although we’ll get to that), but physical vulnerability, social vulnerability.
For instance, making yourself vulnerable doesn’t just mean being willing to share your fears or
insecurities. It can mean putting yourself in a position where you can be rejected, saying a joke
that may not be funny, asserting an opinion that may offend others, joining a table of people
you don’t know, telling a woman that you like her and want to date her. All of these things
require you to stick your neck out on the line emotionally in some way. You’re making yourself
vulnerable when you do them.
In this way, vulnerability represents a form of power, a deep and subtle form of power. A man
who’s able to make himself vulnerable is saying to the world, “I don’t care what you think of me;
this is who I am, and I am OK with it.” He’s saying he has True Confidence and that he’s high
status.
Most people think of a man who’s vulnerable as a man who cowers in the corner and begs
others to accept him or not hurt him. This is not vulnerability; this is surrender and weakness.
Think of it this way, there are two men. One stands tall, looks straight ahead. Looks people in
the eye when he speaks to them. Says what he thinks and is comfortable if some people
disagree with him. When he makes a mistake, he shrugs it off and apologizes if necessary.
When he sucks at something, he admits it. He’s unafraid to express his emotions, even if that
means he gets rejected because of them sometimes. He has no problem moving on to people
who don’t reject him, but like him for who he is.
The second man hunches over, his eyes dart around and he is unable to look someone in the
eye without getting uncomfortable. He puts on a cool persona that is always aloof. He
performs. He avoids saying things that may upset others, and sometimes even lies to avoid
conflict. He’s always trying to impress people. When he makes a mistake, he tries to blame
others or pretend it didn’t happen. He hides his emotions and will smile and tell everyone he’s
fine even when he’s not. He’s scared to death of rejection. And when he is rejected, it sends
him reeling, angry, and desperate to find a way to win back the affection of the person who
doesn’t like him.
Which one of these two men is more powerful? Which one is more vulnerable? Which one is
more comfortable with himself? Which one do you think women would be more attracted to?
From an evolutionary perspective, vulnerability makes perfect sense as an indicator to women
of a male’s status and fitness. Let’s say there’s a tribe of 20 men, all hunter-gatherers, all men
with more or less equal possessions (or lack thereof).
Some of the men in the tribe are constantly reactive to what the other men tell them. They
don’t admit faults. They change their behavior and what they say to win the approval of the
other men. When something doesn’t go their way, they look to blame someone else. What
would this say about their status in their tribe? If they’re basing all of their behavior on the
approval of the other men and are constantly covering up their weaknesses, it says that
they’re low status, not trustworthy, needy, and probably not going to be a dependable father.
Now imagine other men in the same tribe who are unfazed by the neediness or temper
tantrums of the other men around them. They focus purely on their task at hand and don’t
change their behavior based on what others think of them. When challenged, they stand up for
themselves, but when wrong they also admit their fault, as they see no reason to hide their
weakness. They have a sense of honor. They don’t react to any of the other men around
them,rather, the other men react to them.
This behavior implies high status, a man who is dependable, comfortable in his strengths and
weaknesses, a man who can be counted on and who is likely to rise through the ranks and
provide for his offspring.
He’s likely to succeed and likely to be a dependable father.
My belief is that women have been naturally selected to choose high status men based on
their behavior first, and then their looks and accomplishments second — as looks and
accomplishments tend to be reflections of high status behavior, not the other way around.
This high status behavior indicates a man who is comfortable with vulnerability, who isn’t afraid
to express who he is, warts and all, to the world. This plays out in multiple arenas — in the life
decisions he makes (Part III), the extent of his courage (Part IV) and the way he communicates
to others (Part V).
Chances are, if you’re reading this and are bad with women, then you’re bad with women
because you don’t express your true feelings and intentions very well at all. Perhaps you’re
afraid to approach women you find attractive, or ask them out on a date. Perhaps you
consistently fall into boring conversation topics because they’re “safe” and shallow and you
don’t have to risk offending or inciting anyone with them. Perhaps you don’t assert yourself
and your desires enough. Perhaps you’re stuck in a job or lifestyle you don’t truly enjoy,
because other people always told you that it was a good idea and you didn’t want to upset or
disappoint others. Perhaps you haven’t exercised or groomed yourself to the extent that you
could because you didn’t want to stand out too much. Dressing extremely well makes you feel
uncomfortable, smiling at strangers makes you feel creepy, and the idea of hitting on a woman
openly scares you because of the possibility of rejection.
All of these are symptoms of a root problem: an inability to make yourself vulnerable.
Many men, like you, and like me, were raised in such a way as to not express our emotions
freely. For whatever reason — maybe our home situation, maybe childhood trauma, maybe our
parents didn’t ever express their emotions either — we’ve grown up with habits embedded
deeply into us to keep us stifled and bottled up. Don’t be controversial. Don’t be unique. Don’t
do anything “crazy” or “stupid” or “selfish.”
I was the same way. My entire young life I was terrified of anyone not liking me. The mere
thought of someone hating me, girl or guy, would literally keep me up at night.As a result, every
aspect of my life revolved around people-pleasing, hiding my faults, covering my tracks, blaming
others.And needless to say, I barely had any success with women.And when I did finally get a
girlfriend, she left my ass for a man who could actually express himself.
This all may sound hokey and new-agey. Trust me, it’s not. Connecting with women in this
way, by being vulnerable — as opposed to performance or False Confidence — will result in
some of the best interactions and relationships of your life. In the past three years I’ve had
women thank me for having a one-night stand with them; women tell me that our week
together meant more to them than their entire four-year relationship with their ex-boyfriend;
women ask me to take their virginity because I was the first guy who they trusted enough to
do it. I have beautiful women from all over the world that I keep in touch with years later and
share wonderful memories with — some of whom I spent less than 48 hours with when I met
them.
Vulnerability is the path of true human connection and becoming a truly attractive person.As
psychologist Robert Glover once said:“Humans are attracted to each other’s rough edges.”
Show your rough edges. Stop trying to be perfect. Expose yourself and share yourself without
inhibition. Take the rejections and lumps and move on because you’re a bigger and stronger
man.And when you find a woman who loves who you are (and you will), revel in her affection.
But opening yourself up to vulnerability, training yourself to become comfortable with your
emotions, with your faults, and with expressing yourself without inhibitions doesn’t happen
overnight. This entire book can be viewed as a how-to guide for vulnerability. But it’s a process,
and at times a grueling one.
The Pain Period
When undertaking any emotional shift or change in behavior, there’s going to be an initial “pain
period.” The pain period typically happens in the beginning of forming any new habit. It’s the
period of greatest resistance and discomfort and the period in which most people give up.
Whether it’s bodybuilding, learning a new language or starting a new job, there’s going to be an
awkward and difficult period where you’re going to struggle, fail at times, and most of all, feel
vulnerable.
Most people absolutely hate this feeling and avoid it as much as possible. Being vulnerable
hurts. It’s embarrassing. That first time you approach a girl in a bar in your life, chances are
you’re going to be freaking out.And if she doesn’t react well, it’s going to be quite painful.And
that’s all right. That first time you pick up the phone to call a girl you like. The first time you go
in for the kiss. These are all nerve-wracking moments that are not very pleasant to go through.
It’s especially difficult if you’ve already had success in the past through performance or False
Confidence. Practicing vulnerability often means that you will have to “get worse before you
get better.”
And chances are, the more you’ve bottled up your emotions throughout your life, the more
painful these actions are going to be.As vulnerability researcher Brené Brown says, “The less
you talk about your shame, the more of it you have.”
This book presents a myriad of ways in which to change your life: how to dress better, express
yourself better in conversation, approach women on the street, make women laugh, become
physically intimate, build a network of friends who make you happy and much more. But all of
these things have one thing in common: they’re going to require you to open up to being
vulnerable. Whether it’s forcing yourself to make some new friends, or forcing yourself to go in
for that kiss, you’re going to be making yourself vulnerable.
And the feeling is going to suck.A lot.
You’re going to feel uncomfortable. You’re going to come up with rationalizations about how
you’ll do it next time. You’ll plan ahead, procrastinate and then re-plan and then procrastinate
again, and then decide you need to read this book a couple more times — all because you’re
scared to death of that vulnerability.
Maybe you’ve already been through this. Maybe you’ve already spent months or years avoiding
taking action because you’re afraid of the consequences. Maybe you’ve put off that career
change, that wardrobe upgrade, joining that dating site. Maybe you’ve missed opportunities
with women who liked you because you were too afraid to make a move. Maybe you convinced
yourself that you needed to “know how” first. Maybe you convinced yourself that you needed
to see someone else do it first.
These are all forms of avoidance.And we’ll get into them and pick them apart ruthlessly in Part
IV. But the point is, making yourself vulnerable is really, really, really hard and can be really,
really, really painful. And the less vulnerable you’ve let yourself be throughout your life, the
harder it’s going to be to start.
But accepting the inevitable pain period is the first step towards getting over it. Most guys,
instead of accepting the awkwardness and the discomfort, try to educate themselves on ways
to skip it.
You can’t skip it. The only way out is through.
I’ll give you two examples from my own life. Two girls. Let’s call them Melina and Kate. Melina
may have been the first girl I slept with after my disastrous break up in 2005. I’m not entirely
sure. She and I had great natural chemistry and would sit around and talk for hours. But little
did Irealize how angry I was and how much baggage I was carrying around from my ex.
So one night, talking with Melina, I just went off… for like 15 minutes straight, about my stupid
whore of an ex, and went into minute detail about all the fucked up stuff she did, just on and
on and on and on.So bitter and hurt.So unnecessary. I finished. I hadn’t even realized how long
I had gone on rambling. Then after an awkward silence, Melina looked at me as if scared by
something and calmly said,“I probably didn’t need to know all of that.”
Ouch.
She and I quickly fell apart and stopped seeing each other. I was mortified. I ran into her a
number of times after that for months and I would always feel nauseous with embarrassment.
Kate, on the other hand, was the third or fourth girl I dated after my break up. We will talk about
sexual anxiety later on, but I really had it bad back then. Like really bad. To the point where I
wasn’t even able to have sex half the time with the first handful of girls who wanted to sleep
with me.
Kate was slightly older than me and extremely sexual. Our “first date” was her calling me on
the phone and flat out saying, “I want you to come to my apartment and fuck me on my
kitchen counter.”
“Uhh… OK, sounds good.” I played it cool. I was terrified in my head though. Girls really do this
stuff? What does this mean? She barely even knows me.
So I get over there. I’m freaking out, all up in my head, and I can’t even keep it up long enough
to get it in her. Once again, completely mortified. This had happened with other girls before, but
I had always been drunk so I had an excuse. No excuse this time. So I owned up to it. I told her
that I was inexperienced and was just coming out of a major dry spell and that I was really
nervous. I could see her attraction for me spiral away.
But she was cool about it. She said she understood, to relax, take my time, let her know or
whatever.And then I did the super, lame beta thing that every pick up book told me to never,
ever, ever do: I asked her if we could get to know each other better first.
It went against everything a “real man” was supposed to do. But it was vulnerable and it was
true.
And… we did.And then we had sex later, once I had calmed down and was comfortable. She
was supportive, although obviously frustrated at first. But she never held it against me. We still
did it on her kitchen counter.And it was great. I dated her on and off for almost a year. The sex
was great.And she was a great friend.
Obviously your issues and neediness are going to be different. My point in all of this though, is
that early on, when the neediness and vulnerability come out, it's awful. It’s not sexy. In fact, it’s
usually incredibly unattractive.
But that’s part of the process. The Pain Period. Slowly you become comfortable with it. You
become unattached to it. And then you become OK with it. The things I just wrote above
embarrassed me to the point that I wanted to die when they happened. Now I can talk about
them without shame or regret.And these are the types of stories that I’ll often share with new
women when I date them, told in a similar fashion.
“I was embarrassed. Yes, it sucked. Yes, I have issues. No, I’m not perfect.” The implication
being the whole time that I’m fine with it. I’m not looking for sympathy or validation. I don’t need
anything from her. It’s just who I am,rough edges and all. I have True Confidence.
We all have weaknesses, embarrassments and vulnerabilities. An unconfident man is terrified
to show them because they care more about what others feel about him than what they feel
about themselves. A confident man is comfortable showing his flaws because he’s more
comfortable with how he feels about himself than how others feel about him.
Sharing yourself openly with others forces that transition between the two: from unconfident
and afraid of what others think to confident and comfortable in how you feel about yourself.
The reason is because sharing these truths about yourself forces you to own them and accept
them, and also demonstrates that feeling embarrassed or ashamed is just that, just another
feeling, another part of your humanity, not the end of the world.
The real question is: do you have to work through this emotional baggage and neediness with
the women you’re dating? Not always. You can work through them by sharing them with
friends, family members, or a therapist. But there are some issues that can only be dealt with
by women you’re seeing: particularly intimacy and sexual issues.
But slowly, you will chisel away at yourself. You’ll humble yourself, expose yourself, and then
learn that it’s OK. It’s OK to be rejected. It’s OK to make mistakes. It’s OK to say something
stupid. Don’t give up. Women will not dislike you for your rejections and mistakes or saying
something stupid.
They’ll like you for your ability to be OK with being rejected, to make mistakes, and to say
something stupid. The man who always has the perfect line to say to her is a man she will not
trust.Because he shows no vulnerability and his words are inauthentic and therefore needy.
The man who has some good lines and some bad lines and is able to admit the latter and
laugh at the former, this is a man she will trust and a man she will open herself up to, both
emotionally and physically. Become comfortable with being imperfect. It’s your rough edges
she’ll be attracted to.
That’s because a man who becomes comfortable with his vulnerability develops True
Confidence. Being vulnerable forces you to accept and prioritize your own perception of
yourself over those of others.
Why? Because you have no choice.As you make yourself vulnerable, you will experience both
success and rejection. And as you experience success or rejection, you will be forced to
upgrade your own sense of self-worth. There’s no other option.Slowly, but surely, you’ll chisel a
“Don’t Give a Fuck” attitude out of yourself that is genuine yet giving at the same time. A
benevolent selfishness.
But this can only be done by consistently exposing yourself and opening up your emotions and
true thoughts first to yourself and then to those around you.
This isn’t pretty at first. The worst part of the pain period is the fact that most people who
have been stifling their emotions their entire lives have pent up a lot of anger, frustration and
shame over the years. Typically, the older you are, the more you have pent up.And when you
start to express this anger and shame, it can get ugly and
uncomfortable.
You may find yourself behaving irrationally, developing strange beliefs, or becoming angry at
many people. In many cases, this is why I encourage men who struggle deeply with vulnerability
to see a therapist to perhaps guide them through this process.
You may be reading this and thinking, “Well, that’s all fine, but I already express myself really
well, and am pretty aware of my emotions.”
Really?
See, I don’t buy it. In all of my years doing this, the single common thread between every man
I’ve worked with who has problems with women is either a lack of awareness of his own
emotional motivators, or an inability to express his emotions freely with those around him.And
the sad part is, almost all of these men think they’re fine. We always think that we’re the ones
who are fine. It’s everyone else who is screwed up.
But I’ll say this: if you consistently find it difficult to keep a girl interested in conversation; if you
suffer from large amounts of anxiety around women; if you constantly feel a need to prove
something to others or yourself; then there’s something there. Trust me, there’s something
there.And there’s something you’re not expressing or some emotion you’re not in touch with.
And that’s fine. We all go through it.
Since a lot of men have a hard time seeing what vulnerability actually looks like in their
interactions, below is a matrix of examples. The matrix includes each combination of a
vulnerable or non-vulnerable man with a manipulative or non-manipulative woman.
You can also view the men in these examples as being confident or unconfident.
I’ve included manipulative and non-manipulative women in the examples because a lot of
men’s biggest concerns with vulnerability are that they will somehow be used or hurt or taken
advantage of if they open up too much. But my point is that True Confidence attracts True
Confidence, False Confidence attracts False Confidence, and performance attracts
performance. Let’s take a look.
Example 1: Non-Vulnerable Man with Manipulative Woman
Him: So after school I actually hitchhiked my way down to San Diego. It was a little bit crazy
and my parents hated it.
Her: Wow, you’re pretty irresponsible.
Him: I’m as irresponsible as they come. Why, does that intimidate you? *sly grin*
Her: *laughs* Intimidate me? I don’t think you could if you tried. Him: Keep it up and we’ll find
out soon enough.
This is a classic example of performance meets performance and the kind of retort that a lot of
pick up advice would advise you to use.
Notice that you’re basically entering into a verbal sparring match with her, manipulation against
manipulation.Yes, this does work… on manipulative women.
This lacks vulnerability because you’re masquerading your actual identity in order to outwit her
or to be “more dominant” or whatever the the phrase is they use these days.
The other variation of the lack of vulnerability here is to go the Nice Guy route and agree with
her in an apologetic way. For instance: “Yeah, but I’ve grown up since then. I’m very responsible
now.” This works on, well, just about nobody. But when it does, it plays into manipulative
women as well.
All in all, it’s a shitty and unpleasant interaction. Even if you do get laid, you have to constantly
sit there and battle with the woman long enough to trick both of you into thinking you actually
like one another.
Example 2: Non-Vulnerable Man with Non-Manipulative Woman
Him: So after school I actually hitchhiked my way down to San Diego. It was a little bit crazy
and my parents hated it.
Her: Wow, that’s pretty extreme. What motivated you?
Him: Motivated me? Hah, what motivated it is I do whatever the fuck I want.
Her: No, but I mean, did something in particular inspire you to do that? Him: I’m inspired all the
time.You know, I used to play in a rock band. There was this one time, blah, blah, blah…
Notice in this example the woman is actually genuinely curious about the man’s life and his
motivations. She questions it not out of manipulation but out of genuine curiosity. But a man
could easily interpret this as her “testing” him or patronizing him in a sarcastic way. In the
example, the guy is so caught up in being a tough-guy asshole (read: insecure) that he doesn’t
give her a straight response, and instead comes off as very try-hard.
This is False Confidence. And this type of stuff will turn off confident women in two seconds
flat. The Nice Guy variation of this would be to avoid the intimate questions and make some
sort of self-deprecating statement, like “Haha, I don’t know, I was being stupid.” This would be
harmless but would kill attraction and likely lead to the friend zone.
So what have we noticed? A lack of vulnerability turns off nonmanipulative women and gives
manipulative women more ammunition to come at us with drama. Non-manipulative women
get tired of us and reject us. Manipulative women become energized and we have to spar our
way into their pants.
So what about an honest, vulnerable approach?
Example 3: Vulnerable Man with Manipulative Woman
Him: So after school I actually hitchhiked my way down to San Diego. It was a little bit crazy
and my parents hated it.
Her: Wow, you’re pretty irresponsible.
Him: Not really.
Her: Ditching your family to go and try to be some badass surfer guy. Give me a break. How
self-centered can you be?
Him: That’s a pretty judgmental way to look at it.
Her: I just think it’s stupid and disrespectful.
Him: Well, it’s clear our values differ. It was nice meeting you. Her: Wait, what?
Him: Goodnight.
Her:Are you serious? You’re leaving? NOW?!
Him:Yes.
Her: I’m sorry. Wait. Don’t go. I didn’t mean it like that.
Him:*Walks out*
This is an example of how vulnerability can embody strength. The power of vulnerability comes
in setting strong boundaries. In this example, the woman is judgmental and probably
exaggerating her objections in order to make the man feel insecure around her. He identifies
her judgment for what it is and has the balls to come out and say it. He identifies that she’s not
living up to his values or expectations, lets her know and then promptly dumps her on the spot.
This is not easy to do.
In fact, I know few men who could reliably do this in this situation, even men who date a lot of
women and get laid regularly. The reason it’s so hard is because you’re disregarding another
person’s perception in favor of your own. You’re exposing your values and your desires openly.
And as a result, this woman is likely going to think you’re an over-sensitive asshole for the rest
of her life. That’s vulnerability. That’s risking far more than standing there and arguing with her
or teasing her back.
One horrible mindset that a lot of men get into is the idea that they have to “win” situations
like this. There’s no winning here. Even if you outwit a bitch to sleep with her, you’re still
sleeping with a bitch. It’s a lose/lose situation.
The beauty of setting such strong boundaries is that you screen out manipulative women
insanely quickly. Guys always think I’m crazy or lying when I say that I never get tested. But I
don’t. I never date manipulative or bitchy girls. I consistently date really beautiful women with
high values, high self-esteem, and strong self-awareness. How? Because I dump so many from
the get-go for stupid stuff like this that I never have to worry about it again. I am ruthless when
it comes to this. I’ll leave in the middle of a first date. I’ll walk away mid sentence. I don’t care. I
don’t have time for girls who suck. And as a result, either they adapt to my expectations or I
never see them again. I respect myself and therefore I will not spend time with women who do
not respect me.
The irony here, of course, is that manipulative woman can’t take this. In their mind, they just
“lost” and so they’ll do anything to get you back. Sometimes they’ll step up their games, call
you a dozen times, plead with you for another chance. But other times they’ll straighten up.
Often women will apologize and then never mess with you again.As soon as they know you’re
willing to walk away at any moment, they will not mess with you.
Finally, I should note that I don’t hold these standards to look for a soul mate or anything. Even
in casual sex situations, I maintain these standards. And the paradox is that meeting and
dating women actually feels easier once you adopt this mindset. You would naturally think,
“Oh, that means I have to meet twice as many women, I have to put in twice as much effort,
since I’m rejecting half of the ones who like me.” Actually, you end up putting in far less effort,
because you’re no longer wasting so much time and energy trying to convince her that you’re a
cool guy. You’re no longer exhausting yourself wondering whether she likes you enough or not,
or worry about how to impress her or win her back. When she doesn’t live up to your standards,
the situation is made extremely easy for you: you walk. No thought involved. No arguing. No
super witty comebacks. Just: her behavior doesn’t meet my standards, I’m going to meet
someone else now.
Example 4: Vulnerable Man with Non-Manipulative Woman
Him: So after school I actually hitchhiked my way down to San Diego. It was a little bit crazy
and my parents hated it.
Her: Wow, that’s pretty extreme. Is there anything that motivated it? Him: Well, part of it was
just classic rebelliousness. But my family is pretty conservative.And I never felt like I completely
fit in. Looking back, it was obvious that I needed to do something that made me feel
independent, something that gave me my own identity.
Her: Yeah, that makes sense. I think everybody needs to do that to a certain extent, maybe
not in such extreme situations.
Him: Definitely. I had a blast though. I mean, at the time, it felt like I was about to ruin my life or
something, but now I look back and it’s just a cool thing I did one summer.*laughs*
Her: Haha, yeah, it’s funny how things that used to be a big deal when you were younger aren’t
any more.*laughs*
Him:Yeah, like a first kiss or a first date.*laugh*
Her: Oh totally. I remember my first kiss. We planned it like a week in advance. My legs were
shaking the whole time.
And here is an example of two emotionally mature, non-manipulative adults who are attracted
to each other. I threw in the transition to a sexual subject to show how easily it can be done
once you’re already on personal topics. This is kind of a tangent, but a lot of men who have
trouble sexualizing their conversations are never talking about something that can create
sexual tension.
A big reason for that is that their conversations are shallow. When you’re discussing the
weather, the baseball scores, what you majored in in school and so on, it’s hard to jump to your
favorite sexual position. But if she’s talking about the time she went crazy and stole her
brother’s car and you relate it to how one time you and your exgirlfriend snuck into a hotel and
had sex in an empty conference room… it gets very, very easy. Why? Because you’re being
vulnerable. Getting involved sexually is an act of vulnerability, so if you’re both already being
vulnerable up until that moment, it’s just a logical nextstep.
But we will get into this more later on in the book. The point that I hope these examples drive
home is that vulnerability is not weak.Vulnerability involves setting strong boundaries and then
connecting with woman on a meaningful level.And this is not easy. In fact, it’s far harder than
performing.And it’s far harder than developing False Confidence.
Psychological research shows that people of similar self-esteem end up attracted to one
another. Research also shows that men and women with similar beliefs about gender end up
together.
What this means is you are who you attract. If you consistently end up with manipulative,
mean women, then there’s something about you that is manipulative and mean; you just don’t
see it yet.
Robert Glover brilliantly describes in his book No More Mr. Nice Guy how men who are always
trying to be nice to get women to like them are actually passive-aggressive and manipulative.
There’s a reason why Nice Guys always end up with narcissistic drama queens. They’re good
matches.And one must admit that to oneself.
I walked around for years with the story that my ex-girlfriend totally screwed me over and
fucked me up emotionally. Eventually I was able to admit that actually I had been a pretty
shitty boyfriend, needy and passive-aggressive. And I wasn’t surprised that she left me. That
change in narrative changed my relationships with women. I was no longer a victim, but
suddenly 100% responsible for the relationship results I ended up with.
False Confidence assholes may get laid, but the quality of the experience is rarely high
because they’re doing it through duping women who are trying to dupe them.
Sex and relationships are best when they’re both consciously agreed upon. And to be
conscious, they have to be manipulation free. And to be manipulation free, you must be
vulnerable.
The Investment Paradox
Finally, the true power of vulnerability is that it resolves the investment paradox. The
investment paradox, as mentioned in the previous chapters, is the apparent conflict between
the two aspects of female attraction. Women are attracted to men who are of higher status
than themselves (or in our terms, display more True Confidence). They are also aroused by
men who desire them. The paradox is that typically, if a man shows desire towards a woman,
then he’s also showing some degree of neediness or lack of confidence that he’s lower status
than she is, thus making himself unattractive.
The common term for this is “putting her on a pedestal.”
A lot of men and pick up advice side-steps this paradox by coming up with tricks and tactics
which are able to display status while simultaneously giving the impression of not showing
desire or being needy. This is performance.And it works, but only in the short term.
Vulnerability short-circuits the paradox. A man comfortable being vulnerable will behave with
confidence. And when desire is shown with confidence, it is attractive. When desire is shown
with neediness and a lack of confidence, it is unattractive.
What I’m saying is that showing your desire in a woman doesn’t necessarily have to be
desperate or unconfident.You can show desire while being confident.
Think about it this way. Tom approaches Sally. Prior to talking to her, Tom hovers over her
shoulder for a good 30 seconds. He’s a little drunk. Once he works up the nerve, he leans in,
and has a big grin showing both excitement and nervousness. He asks for her name and sticks
out his hand. His voice wavers a bit as he tells her how pretty she is. She’s flattered but a little
uncomfortable. She says, “Thanks.” He holds her hand a little too long and stares at her and
says, “No, really, just so, so pretty...” It’s getting a little awkward now. Sally kind of wants her
hand back. Tom is looking around and seems to be scrambling mentally to think of something
else to say. He finally comes out with a weak, “Where are you from?” Sally’s now completely
uncomfortable and finds an excuse to leave.
An hour later, Bill approaches Sally. Bill is well dressed and seems to be in control of all of his
actions. His movement is fluid and simple. When he approaches Sally he walks directly up to
her and unapologetically stands in front of her. She looks up at him as he sticks out his hand.
He says, “Hi, my name is Bill, I thought you were very beautiful and wanted to say hi.” His
handshake is as firm as his voice. His slight smile shows confidence — confidence that even if
she told him to fuck off, Bill would probably be OK with that. Ironically, this makes her want him
to stay. Sally gives a meek “Thank you” and blushes. Bill then sidles up next to her putting his
arm halfway around her and begins to tell her a story of something that happened earlier in the
night. He doesn’t ask if she wants to hear the story. He doesn’t wait for her to ask him
something. He just starts talking, as if he’s known her for half his life.And if Sally didn’t want to
hear it,Bill would probably just go find another girl to tell his story to.And that’s fine.
As mentioned in Chapter 2, women are attuned to a man’s overall behavior and demeanor —
not just what he says, not just how much is in his bank account. They look at what his behavior
is and what it says about his level of confidence.
The way to combat a lack of confidence is by opening up to vulnerability. This can be done
without over-investing in others. In fact, the opposite is true, the more you open up to your
emotions and the less inhibited you become, the “edgier” you’ll become to women, the more
controversial you’ll become.A bad boy with a heart.
And ultimately, that’s what women want, a strong, independent, high status male — a “doesn’t
take shit from anybody” bad boy — but they want this bad boy to have a depth and a
sensitivity that they only open up and show when they’re around her.
Despite what every fiber of your being may be telling you, opening your thoughts, actions and
feelings up to being vulnerable actually defines attractive behavior in men. Being an
independent and confident person depends on it.Acting on your desires and making moves on
women depends on it.And once she gets to know you, displaying an emotional vulnerability to
her will make her go weak in the knees (and maybe even you too).Plain and simple.
But there’s a catch. Usually when I give men the vulnerability spiel, their first reaction is to say,
“Oh, OK, so I’ll tell her all of these sob stories and she’ll want to have sex. Got it.”
It’s not that simple. We’ll get to this in depth in Chapter 12, but the meaning of your
communication is your intention, not the data conveyed. So telling a woman a sob story with
the intention to make her feel sorry for you so you can get laid is going to actually come across
as needy and self-serving and not vulnerable at all. It doesn’t work that way.
Stop looking at communication as the surface information and instead pay attention to the
emotions and motivations behind what's said. That's where all of the meaning is.
I’ll say this again because this often gets lost: vulnerability is not a technique or tactic. It is a
way of being.
Sometimes I get emails from men saying something like, “Hey, I told this girl all about my dog
dying and how I hate my mom.She didn’t have sex with me.Vulnerability doesn’t work.”
And when I get these emails, I shake my head. He doesn’t get it. “Doesn’t work,” he says.
Here’s a piece of advice: if you ever find yourself thinking “That didn’t work,” or “This doesn’t
work,” then you are performing and you lack True Confidence.Point blank.Period.
When women connect emotionally with you and your desire for them, it’s not because of what
you’re saying or the words you’re choosing — it’s the emotion behind those words.
If the emotion behind your words is needy and self-serving, then she will become turned off no
matter what you say, even if you’re telling her the most vulnerable and heartfelt story. If the
emotion behind your words is genuine and vulnerable, then it will turn her on, even if you’re
talking about your grocery list or how you named your dog. Yes, you can fake this stuff in the
short-term if you become a good actor. But obviously, don’t do that. We’re not in this for shortterm
fixes,remember?
So the catch is that your statements must be authentic. Your statements towards women
must be unconditional, otherwise it’s not really being vulnerable. If you tell a woman that she’s
beautiful only because you think it’ll give you a better chance of sleeping with her, then
amazingly, she will not be very flattered. Try it. It’s true. Give women false compliments and see
how they respond. They won’t respond very well.
But communicate with honest appreciation and you’ll be amazed how she lights up in front of
you.
So the catch is that everything you say must be as authentic as possible. There’s no shortcut.
There are no tricks. You say it because you mean it and mean it because you say it. The more
nervous it makes you, the better, because it means you’re being authentic and making yourself
vulnerable.
How attractive you are is based on your non-needy behavior.Your nonneedy behavior is based
on how vulnerable you’re able to make yourself. And how vulnerable you’re able to make
yourself is based on how honest you are to yourself and others.
Which brings us to our next chapter: the gift of truth.
Chapter 4: The Gift of Truth
“The only thing that’s Capital-T True is that you get to decide how you see things.”
- David Foster Wallace
M ost men relate to the idea of trying to attract a woman without looking like you’re trying. Or
trying to be cool without looking like you’re trying to be cool. Entire books and schools of dating
advice have been built on this idea — pursuing a woman without actually letting her know that
you’re interested in her.
Sounds like a lot of work, unnecessary work at that.
Like I described before, this works, but it’s a short-term solution that requires a lot of time and
effort. In my opinion it’s a terrible investment of time and effort. You may as well invest that
time and effort in yourself and let your identity and honesty do all of the attracting for you.
Ultimately, it’s unconfident behavior and no matter how much misdirection you run on a
woman, you’re going to inevitably show your true self. The only women it’s going to work on are
the ones who are so unconfident themselves that they’re willing to tolerate your unconfident
behavior.
On top of that, walking the tightrope of pursuing her without looking like you’re pursuing her
requires a lot of attention and effort. You can slip up easily. It’s very unforgiving and ultimately,
not a very enjoyable process. Besides, all of the attention and effort on “gaming” women this
way ironically encourages you to be even more highly-invested and needy therefore
decreasing her likely attraction for you.
As we covered in Chapter 3, honestly demonstrating your interest in a woman short-circuits
this issue. It’s a loophole in the investment paradox.
The debate of whether to show interest to a woman or to not show interest to a woman has
been raging in men’s dating advice for well over a decade now.And as time goes on, the show
interest camp has slowly pulled ahead. It’s leading to more success, less effort and more
honest interactions for men the world over.And here’s why:
The biggest criticism of showing interest to a woman that you want to be with is that it
immediately shows you as highly invested in her responses. When you say, “You’re cute and I
wanted to meet you,” that translates roughly to, “Hi, I want to be with you and am officially
invested in the prospect of it happening.”
What they miss though is the sub-communication going on underneath what’s actually being
said.
The sub-communication is, “I’m totally OK with the idea of you rejecting me, otherwise I would
not be approaching you in this manner. Therefore I'm comfortable with myself and my
prospects.”
Think about it, if a guy wasn’t comfortable with the prospect of a woman rejecting him, he
wouldn’t have been honest in the first place. In fact, he would have pretended that he wasn’t
actually interested in her!
The fact that he honestly approached her with his intentions, that he put his nuts on the
chopping block and made himself vulnerable to her immediately, actually sub-communicates
True Confidence and attractiveness in itself.And on top of that it shows desire for her, which is
going to trigger her arousal.
Remember: what you actually say doesn’t matter; WHY you say it matters.
Always. No exceptions. You can have the best line in the world, but if you’re saying it because
you’re unconfident and are desperate for validation and approval from women, then she is
immediately going to sense that you’re highly invested, and therefore low status, not confident
and not an attractive man. It won’t work.
This is why using pick up lines is ultimately a futile process. I could sell you the best 100 things
I’ve ever said to women, but I can’t ever sell you my intentions or my confidence in myself. You
must develop those on your own. And once you do, the actual lines you say will be personal
and congruent to you and nobody else.
The first time I experienced this first-hand was a truly eye-opening experience. It happened
back in 2006. I was still naive and relatively inexperienced with women. In fact, I had been only
going out and trying to meet women for less than a year, and I was still adamantly convinced
that I needed to have the best lines and jokes to get a girl to become interested in me.
And that’s when I first ran into one of the most important lines I’ve ever heard in my life:
“Hey honey, can I pee in your butt?”
I stood there horrified as my friend shouted this at literally every attractive girl who came within
five feet of us.
At the time, to help myself get better with girls I started hanging out with a couple guys who
got more women than anyone else I knew. The idea was that I’d go out with them, study what
they said to women in their interactions and then emulate it.
I’d just listen to what they said, then I’d go out and say the same thing, and then I’d get girls
too.Easy,right?
Enter my friend Matt and “Can I pee in your butt?”
Matt was a guy I briefly met once through a friend, but his reputation was widely known. He
was in a rock band, had tattoos down his arms, and banged girls like it was his job. I had run
into him by chance a week or two earlier and this was my first time hanging out with him for a
whole night.
As you can imagine, his “Can I pee in your butt?” comment wasn’t entirely successful. In fact, I
think just about every girl ran away from us in horror. Matt was drunk and I was seriously
questioning what the hell I was doing out with him.
But then something funny happened. A couple girls laughed. And then suddenly another girl
actually hung around and kept talking to us.
Needless to say, back in 2006, there hadn’t been anything written in pick up manuals that I had
studied about how to transition out of a “Can I pee in your butt?” opener. So I stood there
awkward and confused, waiting to see how this would turn out.
Next thing I know Matt is telling her he’s going to lick her butthole tonight…
OK, forget this, I’m getting a drink. I don’t want to be associated with this guy when he gets
thrown out of the bar.
About fifteen minutes later, Matt finds me, and surprisingly he’s got his arm around the girl he
had been talking to.She’s got a huge smile across her face.
“Hey man, we’re heading back to her place, it was great hanging out, we should do it again
some time.”
I sat there in the bar alone, trying to piece together what I had just seen. It made no sense, and
went against everything I had ever known about women my entire life.
To this day, this was one of the most pivotal nights for me as far as understanding attraction is
concerned. Was it that I learned that “Can I pee in your butt?” is the right thing to say?
No, actually, I still think it’s a pretty awful thing to say.And truth be told, in hindsight my friend
Matt had a lot of False Confidence going on.
But what I learned is that regardless of what you say to a woman, the intention and
implications of WHY you are saying it are far more powerful than the words themselves.
You can say the lamest and grossest (or funniest, depending on your perspective) thing to
women, and if the sub-communication is, “I really don’t care if you laugh or run away horrified,
but here’s who I am, take it or leave it,” this sub-communicates a rock-bottom low level of
investment, and an incredibly high level of vulnerability.
Does this mean that saying grotesque things to women for no other reason than to selfamuse
will get you laid? Not always.And not necessarily often.But you could do worse.
Does it mean that you should go out and try and say things like this? To “fake it ‘til you make
it” with this line and other offensive lines? Well, actually, no... Do you know why?
The Truth Is Always Shining Through
I’ll go ahead and tell you, I actually did go out and say “Can I pee in your butt?” to women the
next week. Can you guess what happened?
Nothing.
In fact, I got a bunch of weird and disgusted looks and not a single laugh.
It’s because I was saying it looking for a reaction. Once again, I was highly invested in how
women responded to me. I simply did not get it at the time: it didn’t matter what I said or didn’t
say; if I said it in a way that demonstrated I cared too much about how they responded to me,
it would never work.
This is because the truth is always shining through. You can’t fake vulnerability and you can’t
fake honesty.By their very definition, it’s impossible.
Men’s dating advice gives women very little credit when it comes to this. Women are generally
quite intuitive to emotions, motivations and social cues. We may think we’re clever when we
come up with a cute line to approach a woman with, thinking that she has absolutely no idea
that we’re secretly hitting on her.She does. They always do.And it’s not a big deal either.
And not only does she know we’re hitting on her, the fact that we seemed so concerned about
getting rejected turns her off. The fact that we had to contrive lines and fake stories in order to
start a conversation with her, whether consciously or not, signals to her that we are highly
invested and not a truly attractive man.
You cannot fake confidence for more than a moment. The only women you will manage to fake
are women who are drunk or who are extremely unconfident themselves. Truth.
Confident and truly high-quality women who are not invested in the attention they receive
from men are not going to have much patience for your lines and games. They will either see
through them and see you for who you really are: scared to expose your vulnerability; or they
will simply assume you’re not worth investing in because you’d rather just talk about spells or
games or whatever.
If you have False Confidence, then your obsessive nature around dominance will seep through
your actions and your lack of empathy and enthusiasm for her as a person will repel any
women of true dignity and grace. It will attract unconfident women full of meaningless trifles
and drama, who will only serve to fuel your anger and antipathy towards women even further.
You cannot fake vulnerability. You cannot fake truth. Truth has to be a gift, given with no
conditions or expectations.
You are who you are who you are.
Even if you lie about yourself or act a certain way, this is actually saying much more about you
and your character than the content of your statements. The truth is always shining through
and people will eventually sense a disconnect.
You can tell women that you’re a record producer and are friends with Jay-Z, but chances are,
unless you’re a really good actor, people are going to sense subtle inconsistencies in your
behavior to back that up. Sooner or later, they will. Then your true identity will shine through,
your lack of vulnerability with shine through, your desperation for affection will shine through,
and you will be a sad, pathetic and unattractive man.
This is an extreme example, but it plays itself out the same way on a smaller scale. Let’s take a
classic example of pretending not to be interested in a girl to get her interested in you.
If you pretend you don’t like a girl, ignore her, act like what she says is stupid or uninteresting,
when in fact you do like her, and you are interested in what she says, subtle cues in your
behavior and body language will slowly but surely tip you off. The armor will crack. It may be
laughing too much at your own joke. Or tilting your head away at an awkward moment. Or
making an awkward comment to her friend that feels forced. But people’s bullshit detectors will
eventually go off, and you’ll be exposed for not presenting an honest expression of yourself.
Unconditionality
But what about men who gush about how beautiful a woman is to flatter her? What about the
men who buy women drinks and beg them for dates and call them incessantly and tell them
how they’re always thinking about them? Those guys are being honest about their intentions
and their feelings, but they’re not getting anywhere, are they?
On one level, they are being honest. They’re being honest about their lack of confidence. Their
problem is not honest expression, but not investing more highly in themselves and developing
their own confidence.
But on another level, they are not being honest about their intentions. They may compliment a
woman and buy her things, beg for her attention, but their intentions are conditional. They’re
not genuine. They’re only giving praise and affection under the assumption that they’ll receive
it in return.
Remember, having True Confidence means that your emotions and motivations are less
affected by her than hers are by you. When you lavish gifts and praise onto a woman who has
not done anything to earn it, you are sub-communicating a desperate need for her attention
and validation — a willingness to sacrifice your self-respect and wealth to win over her
affection. It demonstrates a willingness to alter yourself for her to greater degrees than she’s
willing to alter herself for you. Remember, this is the definition of low status and being
unattractive.
Once again, it comes down to what’s being sub-communicated, rather than what’s being
communicated.
When in doubt, check your intentions.
Think about it: the average guy at the bar who goes around buying cute girls drinks... why is he
buying them? So the girls will sit there and talk to him. When he comments on how beautiful
they are and how he’s so infatuated with them, why is he complimenting them? So that they’ll
like him. When he pays for fancy dinners and offers to buy them jewelry, why is he doing it? So
they’ll be impressed with him and not leave him.
These are not gifts or compliments at all. These are deals he’s brokering. The terms may be
implied or unspoken, but they’re transactions all the same. Everything he gives to her, he is
giving with the expectation to receive something in return. The drinks are not unconditional.
They’re bought with the provision that she stays and talks to him. The compliments are
spoken with the provision that she shows him affection in return.
And when the women don’t show appreciation or don’t reciprocate interest, he becomes
furious, blaming the women for being golddigging, lying whores and bitches.Again, being a Nice
Guy is never much different than having False Confidence. One only gives. The other only
takes.But both are the same in their desperation for approval from women.
This is a subtle form of manipulation, and therefore at its core, dishonest.
Once again, most high value, confident women will see through this immediately and not hang
around a man who does this. In fact, the only women who will go for a man like this are women
who are superficial and willing to trade their affection for material and superficial gain — these
women are soulless and suppress their emotions as much, if not more than the men who buy
things for them.
A confident man expresses his interest unconditionally, expecting nothing in return. This
arouses women and when they do reciprocate his interest, their interest is, in fact, a gift in
return.
True honesty is only possible when it is unconditional. The truth is only the truth when it is
given as a gift — when nothing is expected in return. When I tell a girl that she is beautiful, I say
it not expecting anything in return. Whether she rejects me or falls in love with me isn’t
important in that moment. What’s important is that I’m expressing my feelings to her in that
moment.
I don’t use my compliments as a bargaining tool. I give them unconditionally. An unconfident
man will give a woman a compliment without knowing her and wait expectantly for her to repay
him in either her company or with thanks or with sexual favors. I will give compliments only
when I am honestly inspired to give them, and usually after already meeting a woman and
displaying to her that I’m willing to disagree with her, willing to be rejected by her and willing to
walk away from her if it ever comes to that. This willingness to walk away from her and this
ability to accept nothing in return is what gives my genuine interest so much power.
When a compliment comes from a man seeking nothing in return, it’s a gift of truth, a piece of
his vulnerability and infinitely more powerful as a result.
And this honest compliment inspires women to become more highly invested in return.
Paradoxically, seeking no investment from her will inspire her to invest that much more in you.
Beautiful women are complimented on their looks often, and 99% of these compliments are
given out of neediness, out of some idealization of who she is or what she can do for him.
Beautiful women have been conditioned for most of their lives to know when a man is being
genuine or not, whether the compliment is a gift or a bartering tool.
And when it is a gift, when it is honest, she recognizes and appreciates a man who actually
genuinely appreciates her. These men are rare.
Women are people too (radical idea, I know).And as people, we all value those who value us...
genuinely value us, not expecting something in return.
The biggest aphrodisiac in the world is someone who likes you, genuinely likes you.A woman’s
desire is to be desired. But it has to be genuine desire. It can’t be a, “I’ll desire you as long as
you boost my ego and impress my co-workers,” kind of desire.
We’ll return to the subject of very beautiful women in Chapter 8, but the point is that genuine
no-strings-attached appreciation is rare in this world, particularly from men. Women value this
and invest themselves in the rare man who can demonstrate his vulnerability to her.
Here’s the litmus test. Look at your actions and words around women and look at the
intentions behind them. These intentions are always speaking ten times louder than your
actual words. What are they saying?
If you bought a girl a drink so that she wouldn’t leave to talk to someone else, what does that
intention say about you? It says you were over-invested in her and behaving in a manner that
was not attractive.
If you told a girl a story in order to impress her and make her like you, what does that intention
say about you? It says you were over-invested and behaving in a manner that was not
attractive.
If you invited a woman to a restaurant in order to impress her with how much money you had,
what does that intention say about you? It says you were over-invested and behaving in a
manner that was not attractive.
A man who feels like he needs to buy or steal a woman’s attention or affection through
entertainment, money or superficiality is a man who is not confident in his identity and who is
not genuinely attractive.
I should add that these aren’t all-or-nothing propositions either. Look, we all want people to like
us, and we all like to impress others. We all need some validation sometime. We all do these
things to certain degrees. It’s impossible to be perfectly non-needy all the time.
But neediness is relative. That’s why I say it’s about being less invested in others’ perceptions
instead of NOT invested in others’ perceptions. It’s an important difference.
I’m not advising to become a heartless sociopath. Quite the opposite, really. Because the more
you invest in yourself, the more free you will become to care for others around you without
looking for anything in response.A man who is not confident and does not invest in himself is
ultimately only capable of superficial interactions because his threshold for neediness is so low.
It’s impossible to be not invested in other people. That’s how we’re wired. But it is always
possible to be less invested than she is, to be more invested in yourself and in your own
identity. That’s all it takes.
Setting Boundaries
But delivering honesty unconditionally isn’t just about compliments and appreciation.
Unconditional honesty can be brutal and scathing at times as well. And strangely enough,
brutal and angry honesty can turn a woman on just as much as the most genuine compliment.
Again, it’s not about what’s being said, it’s about the intention and subcommunication behind
it. When you’re willing to cut a woman off and tell her when she’s out of line, when you’re willing
to tell a woman what you will and will not tolerate in your life, this sub-communicates the most
powerful elements of attraction to her. Far more powerful than an entertaining story or game.
This is why it’s quite possible to piss a woman off and turn her on at the same time.Any man
experienced with women is familiar with this.
It’s about drawing boundaries.
If a beautiful woman says something that an unconfident man finds offensive, he’ll ignore it,
change the topic, or withhold his true feelings.
A confident man will tell her what she just said was offensive. Let the chips fall where they
may.
A man who is vulnerable is unafraid to draw boundaries about what he’s willing to accept and
not willing to accept from the people around him.
Men with False Confidence often misconstrue this as a free ticket to tell people they’re always
wrong, or to basically do what they want without paying attention to the feelings of others.
That’s over-compensation and actually the behavior of someone who is over-invested and
validated by the reactions of those around him. A confident man does not seek to impose
himself on the boundaries of others, he’s merely interested in maintaining his own boundaries
while respecting the boundaries of others.
True Confidence means you respect yourself AND others. False Confidence means only
respect yourself.
The difference is that if a woman says something offensive, a man with False Confidence will
berate her and try to get her to change her mind, whereas man with True Confidence will
simply make it clear that he found what she said offensive and will not tolerate it again. How
she responds is her choice.
If a woman makes fun of a confident man’s friends, he will not hesitate to tell her to stop and
stand up for those he cares about. If a woman says she needs to leave a date after 30
minutes, he will not try to trick her into staying or beg her to stay, he will not yell at her or
lecture her on manners. He will smile and say,“Nice knowing you,” and not call her again.
When in doubt, check your intentions.
If a woman asks to bring a friend on a date, he will say no. He will not agree placidly, or complain
to her that what she’s doing is ruining his plans, or yell at her and call her names. He’ll simply
say no and leave it at that. If she threatens to not come out, then he’ll say, “OK,” and go find
another woman.
Hold the line. Don’t go around breaking somebody else’s.
Most questions or problems men email me with, at their core, somehow involve a failure to
maintain boundaries. Whether it’s about a date, a girl not calling him back, a woman making fun
of his job, or whatever, his perceived “problem” is simply him not stepping up and telling her
what he’s willing to accept and not willing to accept from her.
Typically it has to do with something like the following:
“She really liked me and gave me her number.She responds to my texts, but when I tried to get
her out on a date, she made excuses. So then I texted her some more and she said she
wanted to see me, but when she did show up for the second date, she was late and said she
had to go early. She didn’t kiss me. Now I’m texting her and she’s texting back but won’t agree
to go on a third date. What do I do?”
Usually guys like this are obsessive about “the games women play” or how to deal with “tests”
from women.
My answer to these men is always the same: if you make it clear from the beginning that you
are unwilling to put up with games, then not only will the women you attract stop playing
games, but you’ll stop attracting women who do.
In the example above, my plan of action? I would have told her flat out that if she wasn’t
excited to be on a date with me, then I’d rather her save us both the time and not show up.
Yes, I will actually say this to her face. Not in a harsh manner.But in a clear manner.
I’ve said something similar to women probably 5-10 times. Without exception, they’re
completely stunned. Their jaws usually drop. Often, they immediately apologize and say that
they didn’t mean to be so flakey. Oddly enough, my honesty and complete willingness to be
rejected (or to reject them) demonstrate my True Confidence and for the first time, makes
them incredibly attracted to me.
A couple times, they’ve said, “You’re right. I don’t want to date you,” in so many words. And
that’s OK. Yeah, it hurt to hear that. But a lot of shit in life hurts. Get over it. It’s for the better.
She just saved us both a lot of time and effort.
Your ability and willingness to establish boundaries is proportional to how confident you are.
Men who are unconfident and lack vulnerability will keep their boundaries loose and open,
inviting manipulation and other people to walk over them. This is because they are more than
willing to alter themselves in order to receive validation from the women they meet.
Men who are confident establish strict boundaries because they value their own time and
happiness more than receiving attention from a woman. They also see no reason to trample
over other people’s boundaries.
When it comes to making yourself more vulnerable and confident, the first step is often to
begin establishing your own boundaries. Learn how to say no to people, particularly women.
Start having opinions on what you like and don’t like, what you’ll tolerate and won’t tolerate. Be
honest with yourself, painfully honest.And then be painfully honest with her.
The problem with forming strong boundaries is that to form them, you have to be particularly
aware of your own desires and emotions. And many men who have been needy their entire
lives are not very selfaware. They don’t know what they’re willing to stand up for and what
they’re willing to let slide. They don’t know their own emotional motivations and desires.
Men will often have to spend a lot of time seeking truth within themselves first, before they’re
able to express it to others.
Finding Your Truth
Here are some truths that I’ve found out in the past few years:
My overwhelming desire for affection from women probably has a lot to do with the fact that I
was raised by a single mom in adolescence. My parents’ divorce left a deep-seated fear of
commitment in me that still permeates my sex life to this day. That a lot of what I considered
cool when I was younger was really just different ways to protect myself and medicate my
emotional wounds. That I resented my dad for a long time. That I have an peculiar obsession
with my masculinity. That my most important values are honesty, empathy and intellectual
curiosity. That I’m unwilling to tolerate women who don’t make me happy, no matter how hot
they are.
It’s easy for me to say these things now, and what’s important is not the words. What’s
important is the floodgates of emotions that came up as I discovered these truths about
myself. As I discovered these things about myself, it allowed me to express previously stifled
emotions in my daily life and with women.
Because as I’ve discovered each one of the above truths about myself, I’ve then been able to
draw boundaries based on that truth, which in turn makes me less needy.
For instance, when I first started going out, I spent a lot of time beating my head against a wall
trying to pick up the “hot” club girls at loud night clubs. You know, fake tans, fake tits, fake hair,
fake personalities.
For whatever reason, I couldn’t keep their attention long enough. Eventually, after pushing
things further and spending more time and effort in those places than I care to admit, I went
home with a few of them.
And... well, it was pretty disappointing.
What I discovered is that there was not anything objectively better or more interesting about
these girls. In fact, what I was chasing was status, a pat on the back, basically reliving and
redeeming all of my failed high school moments where the pretty girls didn’t pay attention to
me.
It had nothing to do with the girls, it had everything to do with me.
Now, when I meet a girl at a place like that who doesn’t show me any depth to her personality,
I’m unwilling to put any more effort into getting to know her. My boundary is established: I value
curiosity, education, intelligence and authenticity. I also don’t value “fake” looks such as
pounds of make-up, bronzer, hair extensions or super tight skirts.
OK, maybe I do value the tight skirts...
But the irony? Because that boundary is established, I’m not invested in these women much at
all, and as a result I get more attention from them than ever before.
It’s important to look at the reasons why you’re over-invested around women and have an
honest discussion with yourself about it to try and resolve it.
For instance, perhaps you’re over-invested around women because you’re a virgin and have no
experience with them. Then you need to look at how being inexperienced is causing you to
undervalue yourself and seek validation. You must become comfortable with the idea of being
inexperienced and be comfortable admitting that insecurity if you wish to gain a lot of
experience.
Or perhaps your ex-girlfriend left you for another man and you’re bitter. Before you can undo
the anger that is causing you to be overinvested, you need to come to terms with why you’re
angry and accept why your ex left you.
For me, a big part of this was accepting that, actually, I had been a pretty naive and shitty
boyfriend to my ex-girlfriend and I could understand why she would want to leave me. I also
recognized flaws and insecurities in her that I hadn’t noticed when we were together, that she
hadn’t been the perfect angel that I assumed she was. All in all, I came to terms with the
experience and the anger receded, allowing me to let go and become less invested in women I
dated.
Another example is a guy who has never been “cool” before. Perhaps he was picked on
growing up and made fun of all through high school. Maybe the popular guys in school told him
he was gay and a pussy.
Perhaps now he’s older, better looking and more social and is looking to compensate for all of
those years of feeling insignificant. So he does it by throwing money around and attracting a
lot of superficial attention. He’s having fun, but he’s scratching that itch, he’s finally living out
that need to be the cool and popular guy. But at some point he has to come to terms with this,
accept it, and become comfortable admitting it. Then he can move on.
Again, if you’re only trying to get girls to impress other guys, then you’re not in a very good
place, and you need to take a serious look at your motivations. To undo this you must come to
terms with why you’re seeking attention and approval from other men — maybe it goes as far
back as your father — and then seek to find that approval through other means. Join a sports
team. Take your co-workers out for beers. Buy season tickets to the local basketball team.
There are much healthier ways to get male camaraderie than to try and impress other guys by
getting girls.
For me, I had a combination of the second two examples. I spent most of my adolescence living
alone with my mother.As a result, I always related more to girls than to boys, and had few male
friends until I reached adulthood. I never could relate to them as well and not having my father
around as much (both physically and emotionally) drove me to unconsciously seek a lot of
approval from other men.
Throw on top of that the fact my girlfriend of four years left me, and I had a lot of anger toward
women. Combine the two and you have a perfect recipe for a Nice Guy who turned to False
Confidence in order to compensate and become a player.
Recognizing and accepting these truths is the only thing that allowed me to resolve and let go
of a lot of my investment and neediness toward women’s approval. I had to come to terms with
these faults within myself to finally develop True Confidence and attract amazing women into
my life with consistency. As soon as my need to impress other guys dissipated, so did my
investment in how a drunken girl in a bar thought of me. As soon as I let go of some of my
anger towards my ex, some of my need to fuck absolutely everything disappeared too.
As a result, I became less invested and less affected by the actions of the women around me,
which in turn made me more attractive around them.As if by magic, I began to attract for more
beautiful and interesting women with less effort.
And how do I know this? It was clear. My looks didn’t change. I dressed the same way. Went to
the same bars. But suddenly girls were approaching me. I was catching more and hotter girls
smiling at me and staring at me. My outward appearance had changed little. My inner
disposition changed entirely. My outward behaviors soon followed suit.
Seeking the truth within yourself is an arduous long-term progress. An entire book could be
written on it by itself. But I guarantee that you have some deep-seated truths that are
currently causing you to invest too heavily in how women treat you. Otherwise you wouldn’t
have bought this book or read this far.
If you feel like you have some serious emotional issues or believe that for whatever reason
you’re basing an insanely high amount of your identity on how women respond to you, then I
recommend therapy.
Therapy has a lot of negative stereotypes and judgments that come along with it, but if you
take the time to find a good therapist who you trust and gel with, then it can be extremely
helpful.
The important thing about therapy is to remember that it’s a tool, not a solution.A therapist is
there to guide you and motivate you in continuing to find your own emotional truths about
yourself. He or she can’t find them for you. A lot of people show up to therapy expecting a
therapist to magically fix them. They then get frustrated when all they do is “talk” and get
asked annoying questions the whole session.
Those questions are asked for a reason. Be pro-active in finding the emotional knots in
yourself that you didn’t know were there before. You’ll discover some amazing things. That
time the neighbor’s kids locked you in a closet all afternoon, or the time your mother went
home and forgot you at the grocery store, or a parent’s divorce or death of a loved one —
these all have emotional repercussions that can and probably will motivate you and drive you
to over-invest in receiving validation from one specific source or another in your life.
And that source is often women.
Following the advice of this book should help as well. All advice in the book is crafted to help
you behave as a less invested man and develop True Confidence. Implementing these
behaviors and becoming more aware of your emotions while you’re doing them should help you
down the road to permanent change.
As you’ll see, the book is divided up into three core areas to begin implementing into your life
and help you to discover your truth and become less invested: building a congruent and
attractive lifestyle for yourself, overcoming your fears and anxieties, and becoming socially
adept at expressing your emotions and sexuality without shame or hesitation.
All three of these sections will help you carve out a foundation of confidence. As we’ll talk
about in Chapter 7, these things are all interconnected. When you work on one of them, you
indirectly benefit the others, and vice-versa.
Friction and Projection
I’d like to finish up the chapter discussing a couple exceptions when it comes to being
vulnerable and confident around women. I know at the beginning of the book I made the
promise that being less invested in any particular woman than she is invested in you will make
her perceive you as attractive.
Well, that’s true, but just because she perceives you as an attractive man, doesn’t mean she’ll
immediately want to jump into bed with you. Attraction is great, by in and of itself, it’s not
always enough to consummate a romantic or sexual relationship.
There are two main reasons that prevent attracted women from being with you, and they are
both quite common: friction and projection.
Friction is when a woman finds you to be an attractive man, but there are value differences or
external circumstances that prevent her from acting on that attraction or being interested in
you.
For instance, let’s say you’re a rock star who spends his nights getting drunk and banging
groupies and she’s a born-again Christian and has sworn off all sex before marriage. That
mismatch in personal values is going to disrupt any attraction there may be and is a genuine
piece of friction that is going to prevent anything from happening.
The most common case is the girlfriend/wife. This happens all the time. You meet a woman,
you two really click, she’s laughing at all your jokes, smiles when you smile, looks into your eyes
a little bit too long…
…and she’s married.
And not only is she married but she makes a point to cut the flirting off. She’s into you. She
likes you. But she values her marriage more than her attraction to you.And there’s nothing you
can do about that. That’s friction.
Guys often ask me how to get a woman to cheat on her boyfriend or husband and my answer
is you don’t. They decide on their own and you just happen to be in the right place at the right
time (or wrong place at the wrong time depending on your perspective). What gets women to
cheat on their husbands isn’t meeting an attractive man; it’s her being uninvested or unfulfilled
enough in her current relationship to be willing to risk it by sleeping with someone new.
(Sidenote: I really recommend NOT sleeping with a married woman or someone's girlfriend for
many reasons, both ethical and practical. The exception is if their significant other grants
knowing consent.)
Friction can be religious, cultural or simply due to poor logistics. For instance, some legit friction
would be if she lives in Australia and you live in New York. That creates some problems for
dating despite strong attraction.
There’s usually at least a little bit of friction in any interaction. You’re never going to like 100%
of any woman and no woman is ever going to like 100% of you. There will be slight differences
in values or priorities that will irk you just a little bit, or maybe a lot. There will also be
unavoidable situations and events that will cause obstacles to you two being together.
Whether this friction prevents a sexual relationship from occurring though will depend on the
strength of your boundaries and what your expectations are.
For instance, you may meet a really hot girl who is a cocaine addict. But if you kind of just want
to have sex with her, you may overlook the cocaine addiction. Then again, if you have a major
moral issue with narcotics, then you’ll probably be turned off and pass up on her.
Ultimately, your values determine your behavior. And that’s kind of the point of all of this:
YOUR values determine your behavior, not what you think she wants, not what you think
others want, but what is best for you and best for the relationship.
Projection is completely different. There are a lot of women who, for whatever reason, are
afraid of their own sexuality and/or openly sexual men. They harbor trust issues and
resentment with men. Usually this is because they have a history of some sort of
emotional/sexual abuse or they’ve experienced a long string of disappointments or anger with
men growing up, or with former boyfriends.
When confronted with a confident, non-needy man, these women will usually be untrusting
and lash out in response. They are not lashing out for lack of attraction, but they are lashing
out because they are attracted and that strong sexual attraction scares them, particularly if
you’re a man who feels threatening to them. Their view of male sexuality is negative and when
they are confronted with an honest and attractive man they’ll often attack you and try to tear
you down.
In fact, the more non-needy and vulnerable you make yourself, the more projection responses
you’ll invite from people in general. The rejections I get these days tend to be harsher than
ever before. The difference is that I care far less. I don’t believe that’s a coincidence. These are
the girls who will get angry and say snide things like, “I bet you say that to all the girls,” or will
find reasons to push you away and then regret it and want you back.
These women are ultimately uncomfortable with their own sexuality and overly-invested in
men, in their own special way. I find it best to avoid women like this. One of my values is to be
comfortable with sexual expression, therefore a boundary I draw is that I will not date women
who are uncomfortable with my sexuality or uncomfortable with their own.
Generally, these women are extremely unconfident and because of the large investment gap
between you two they will try to project that investment onto you. They will accuse you of
being demanding, overbearing, horny, untrustworthy, or weak. These accusations will have little
to no connection to reality, and a confident man will either walk away from a girl like this or
simply ignore her accusations.
The only men willing to put up with such nonsense are men who are unconfident as well. If the
unconfident man is of the Nice Guy variety, he will spend all of his time placating and trying to
fix the accusations and problems the girl projects onto him. If the man has False Confidence,
then he will usually lash out right back at the woman and they will engage in a relationship full
of petty, unimportant drama, playing out emotions and projecting their histories of pain and
marginalization onto each other over and over again, until one of them finally becomes
conscious enough to break the cycle and move on. Sometimes this happens quickly. Other
times it takes months or years. It’s always unpleasant.
The uncomfortable truth is that the majority of women are going to have high degrees of
friction and projection when you meet them. With most of the women you meet, things are
simply not going to work no matter what you do. This is to be expected. This is fine. This is
what is often referred to incompatibility.
Incompatibility is a fact of life. No matter how you behave or what you’re into, the majority of
women out there at any given time are simply not going to be interested or emotionally
available. Our job is not to attract every woman, but to screen for women with a high potential
of being attracted to us.
The reality of incompatibility defines our entire strategy of dating women. To base our strategy
on anything else is inefficient at best and downright damaging at worst. The world is what it is,
it’s our job to simply present ourselves as boldly and clearly to it as possible, accept the
reactions and move on the opportunities.Anything else is a fool’s errand.
Part II: Strategy
Chapter 5: Polarization
“Any individual who wants to be a leader has to be controversial. Otherwise they don’t stand for
anything.”
- Richard M. Nixon
I n Part I, we laid out the realities of female attraction and what causes that attraction. We
learned that male attractiveness is based on how confident one is and how comfortable one is
in expressing one’s desire and vulnerability. We also learned the limitations of attraction and
how most of the women in the world at any given time are not going to be compatible with you,
no matter what you say or do.
In Part II, our goal is to create a real-world strategy based on these realities so that any man
can map out a clear way to improve his dating life quickly and drastically.
The goals of this strategy are efficacy and practicality. This is a strategy based on reality, not
based on some sort of mythology about unlocking the secrets of every woman, or lofty
promises to be able to sleep with every single hot girl you ever meet.
As a result, the strategy in this book deals with realities that a lot of other men’s dating advice
does not deal with, namely: rejection, race, age, appearance, shame, honesty, emotional
connection and did I mention rejection?
You will get rejected.But don’t worry. It’s a good thing.
A lot of dating advice, particularly of the performance variety, tries to promise the ability to
have sex with any girl you want, regardless of... well, pretty much anything. You could be a fat
slob living in your mother’s basement, and with the right two or three lines you too can date a
lingerie model (as if there’s a lingerie model hanging out on every street corner.)
This is a fairy tale.And not only is it a fairy tale, it’s a fairy tale you don’t actually want to live.
Rejection exists for a reason — it’s a means to keep people who are not good for each other
apart.
Men don’t seem to understand that if a woman rejects him because he’s short, or because she
doesn’t like his hair, or because she finds him boring, then he wasn’t going to enjoy being
around her anyway.
Ask yourself: Why would you want to be intimate with someone who doesn't appreciate you?
Why would you EVER settle for such a person? Because she's hot? Come on, have a little
more self-respect.
Again, it’s men who are unconfident and have poor self-esteem who are willing to completely
alter their personalities in order to seduce ANY woman. The first step to being more attractive
is to see rejection as a means to eliminate women who won't make you happy from your life.
It's a blessing, not a curse.
I say invite the rejection. It's a means to weed out the women who are not good for you and
get to the ones who you will enjoy that much quicker.
But we’ll get into that further in the next chapter.
So let’s start at the beginning. There’s an infinite number of women out there, and we can’t
possibly meet or even know all of them. So our first task is to find a way to narrow them down
and screen them in a way that we can manage them better.
The Three Categories of Women
Obviously, you are not going to desire the majority of the women in the world. So we can cross
out all of the ones who are physically not to your taste. If you don’t find a woman attractive,
don’t approach her, don’t hit on her, don’t do anything. It’s not practice if she’s not hot; it’s
desperation.
That said, decide whatever you like in a woman by your own standards. If you like big girls or
curvy girls, go for it. If you prefer black girls with dreadlocks, more power to you. If you like older
women or younger women, cool. Don’t pressure yourself to live up to someone else’s standard.
And again, for the love of god, if you don’t find her attractive, don’t feel a need to pursue her.
For practical purposes, we can divide up all of the women you’re attracted to into three
categories: Receptive, Neutral and Unreceptive.
Let’s start with Unreceptive.
Women who are Unreceptive are just that: they’re unavailable and/or uninterested in having a
sexual/romantic relationship with you. The most common reasons that put women in this
category are the following:
- You’re far lower status than she is, and she’s therefore not attracted to you.
- She has a boyfriend/husband and is happy in her relationship.
- There’s too much friction preventing her from being willing to date you, such as difference of
values, difference of interests, bad logistics, etc.
- She’s not interested or looking for any man at the moment.
The way to tell if a woman is Unreceptive is if she repeatedly does not reciprocate your signs
of interest and/or shows you signs of disinterest. If you invite her out for coffee and she insists
on bringing one of her friends, then she’s Unreceptive. If you call her three times and she never
calls back, then she is Unreceptive. If you approach her and she explains that she just wants to
spend time with her friends tonight, then she is Unreceptive. If you hang out with her and she
talks about how frustrated she is with her boyfriend and how you’re such a good listener, then
she’s Unreceptive.
No exceptions. Many men waste a lot of time convincing themselves that Unreceptive women
may actually like them. Usually they don't.
The next category is Neutral. This category can be difficult for men to understand because it’s
not as common for us as it is for women. Typically, a man knows within a few seconds if he’s
willing to meet and sleep with a woman or not.
Women aren’t like that. They spend a lot of time being unsure about a man and need to be
swayed one way or the other. They’re fence-sitters in many situations.
Women in this category are usually women who you’ve just met or have only a little bit of time
with. The important thing to know is that women do not ever stay in this category. They
eventually polarize one way or the other.And if you never make an advance or show interest in
them, then they will always polarize towards being Unreceptive (this is the Friend Zone, which
we’ll cover in a minute).
Neutral women are generally that, neutral. They will not turn down your offers, but they won’t
offer or reciprocate themselves. The jury’s still out. They’re still testing the waters. Or
sometimes, they just haven’t considered you in that way yet.A Neutral woman for instance, if
you touch her on the back will not move away, but she will not move toward you or give you
any signal that she likes it.
The goal with Neutral women is to polarize them through your behavior. This may mean being
more aggressive. It may mean flirting with them or teasing them. It may mean asking her on a
date. Whatever it is, the goal with Neutral women is to take an action that forces her to make
a decision about how she feels about you. Which side she polarizes to is less important than
actually taking action and forcing her out of her neutrality, as remember, if you leave her to her
neutrality, she will always eventually become Unreceptive and not see you as dating material.
And remember, showing your desire arouses women. Being overinvested turns them off. So it
all comes down to how you show them your desire. It comes down to how you polarize them.
This, in a nutshell, is what a guy with "game" is: a man who can polarize quickly and confidently.
And in the final category, women who are Receptive are already sexually attracted to you the
moment you meet them. You can recognize women who are Receptive in two ways: they
initiate with you and/or they reciprocate your actions enthusiastically.
Some examples of a woman initiating with you:
- She makes strong eye contact with you and doesn’t break it.
- She approaches you.
- She touches you unprovoked.
- She asks for your number or invites you out with her/her friends.
- She asks you a lot of questions about yourself and seems genuinely interested in you.
- She introduces you to her friends.
- She gives you her number.
- She comes up with some excuse/story/reason for you to hang out with her, or spend time
with her.
These are all concrete examples of a woman initiating with you. Chances are, if you’re reading
this book, many of the girlfriends or sexual experiences you’ve had with women only happened
because she initiated with you.
That’s fine. But just going about your life, unless you are extremely good-looking or have a
great lifestyle, or manage to meet women through good social contacts, few women are going
to initiate with you and the few who do won’t initiate often.
In fact, most women, especially hot women, even if they’re attracted to you, won’t initiate with
you. Remember, women tend to be less invested before sex, therefore they (usually) expect
men to initiate in the beginning. There are also strong cultural pressures on women to wait for
the man to initiate.
The other way women demonstrate that they’re Receptive is when they reciprocate. It’s
important to recognize the subtle difference between a woman reciprocating your advances
and a woman being neutral toward your advances. A woman who is Neutral will simply not
respond at all. For instance, if you touch a Neutral woman on her back while you speak to her,
she’ll just act like you’re not touching her.
A woman who is reciprocating will do something to respond positively to your advance. Think
of it as her signaling to you that she accepts your advancing on her and likes it. If you touched
a woman on the back and she wanted to reciprocate, she would either lean back into you, lean
in closer to you, or touch you in return.
Here are some other common examples of reciprocation:
- She ignores her friends to stay and talk to you.
- She keeps very strong eye contact and laughs a little too much at everything you say.
- When you touch her, she touches you in return.
- When you put your arm around her, she leans into you.
- When you take her hand to move somewhere, she holds it in return.
- When you ask her out on a date, she offers a place to go or mentions something she’d like to
do with you.
Most interested women will reciprocate on small signals to show that they’re interested in you.
Catching on to how women reciprocate and noticing the signals is something that you develop
with experience, but it shouldn’t be too hard if you know what to pay attention to.
A lot of the methods of flirting that we’ll cover in Part V will address the specific ways in which
women reciprocate and how to handle them.
Unfortunately, the vast majority of women you will meet, assuming you’re a typical guy, will be
either Neutral or Unreceptive. This is true for the vast majority of the male population, myself
included, so don’t worry.
The percentage of women that you meet in each category will vary widely from man to man
and also vary widely depending on the context in which you meet women.
For instance, you could be a 40-year-old investing mogul, and at networking events or
conferences, you may find that 40% or more women are Receptive and few make themselves
Unreceptive or Neutral.
But that same man can go to a nightclub full of drunken 20-year-olds and soon find that only
1% of women are Receptive or Neutral, and 99% are Unreceptive.
This is a concept I called Demographics, and I’ve devoted all of Chapter 8 to it because it’s
extremely important.
The exact percentages of women falling into each category aren’t really that relevant.A lot of
men, and even a lot of dating advice books, misplace a lot of time and effort due to not
understanding these three categories. For instance, men will waste a lot of time and energy
trying to convince a married woman to sleep with them, or polarizing a woman who is already
Receptive to them. This is just wasting time and energy.
Strategies for Each Category
Your course of action will differ depending on the type of woman you meet. Many men make
the mistake of applying the wrong strategy to the wrong category of women. For instance,
they’ll try to convince an Unreceptive woman to become Receptive. Or they’ll treat a woman
who’s already Receptive as if she isn’t yet. Not only is this a timewaster, but it’s ineffective as
well.
The goal with Unreceptive women is to identify them and move on as quickly as possible.
They’re time-sinks. Typically, if women are Unreceptive, they’re Unreceptive for a good reason,
and it has little to do with you. You’re almost never going to change the mind of an
Unreceptive woman, and even when you do it’s often not worth the effort required. Also, the
effort required to convince an Unreceptive woman to become Receptive will often cause you
to come across as over-invested and desperate, making you even more unattractive, therefore
causing her to be even more Unreceptive.
I strongly believe in the idea of “Fuck Yes or No.” That is, I want women to say “Fuck Yes,”
once they’ve gotten to know me.And if they aren’t enthusiastic and excited about being with
me, then I’m not interested in them anymore. So Unreceptive women simply aren’t worth my
time or effort to pursue. They could be great people and maybe I’ll be friends with them. But
the minute they’re Unreceptive towards me, my interests have moved on.
I’ll say this: in seven years, after meeting thousands of women, I can think of maybe five
instances where a woman was flat out Unreceptive towards me and I “won her over.” If she
shuts you down, tells you to go away, tells you she’s not interested, tells you she has a
boyfriend: move on. Seriously, get over it and move on. You’re wasting your time. There are 3.5
billion women on this planet. I don’t care how special you think she is, there’s another one out
there who’s just as special who will be Receptive to you.
The two most common time-sinks with Unreceptive Women are the Friend Zone, and women
in relationships.
The Friend Zone occurs when a woman has categorized you as a friend and not a potential
lover. For women, these categories are almost always mutually exclusive. A man is either a
friend, or a potential sexual partner,rarely both. There are exceptions, but they are rare.
Once inside of it, the Friend Zone is almost impossible to get out. And the amount of effort
required to get out is not worth it.
The Friend Zone typically occurs when a man meets a Receptive or Neutral woman but never
makes a move on her. As mentioned earlier, women never stay Neutral and will eventually be
polarized into the Receptive or Unreceptive categories. If you don’t act, they will slowly drift
into the Unreceptive category.
Why? Because a man who does not act on his sexual urges is a man who is unconfident and
therefore unattractive.
A classic, yet painful example of the Friend Zone happened with a friend of my last serious
girlfriend. When I met her, she was moving into her new apartment. There were two guys
helping her move in. One was a tall fellow who obviously seemed eager to please her and help
as much as he could. It did not take long to recognize that he behaved quite unconfidently
around her and made poor attempts to flirt, which she did not reciprocate.
She, of course, being an attractive girl, was not highly invested back, and so I immediately
pegged him as in her Friend Zone.As it turned out, I was right.
This guy hated me the whole time I dated her. He was convinced that I was an asshole (funny
how that works).And after she and I broke up and remained friends, he refused to let her talk
about me around him. During this period, he made numerous attempts to get with her,
sometimes going as far as making tearful proclamations that he had been in love with her for
years.
Needless to say, all of these attempts turned her off and she shut down. It ruined the
friendship. They had been friends with each other for over four years, and the degree of
investment he was showing, even despite his behavior (the fact that he spent four years
working up the nerve to make a move) sub-communicated a massive degree of overinvestment.
Obviously, she rejected him. Again and again she rejected him. So he became
angry.And perceiving me to have been an asshole who didn’t treat her well, he decided to try
to be an asshole who didn’t treat her well either. He went down the road of False Confidence.
He was disrespectful towards her and would blatantly try to kiss her with no regard for what
she thought or felt.
But despite the complete opposite behavior on the surface, he was acting this way because
he was still incredibly unconfident and highly invested. This strained the friendship to the point
where she told him to stop or she would never speak to him again.
The Friend Zone is the biggest possible time-sink because most guys who are stuck in it
entertain fantasies that they’re simply waiting for the inevitable to occur. It plays into their
fantasies of romance and destiny. Their perspective is that they are the perfect man for her
and one day when she wakes up and realizes how foolish she’s being, she’ll realize that the
love of her life had been sitting right there by her all along.
This never happens. Ever. It’s an incredibly arrogant and manipulative mindset to adopt. It’s no
wonder women see it as so unattractive.
If you are in this situation now, you need to get it out of your head and move on. Immediately.
Typically, if guys have been friends with a girl for even a month or two without ever explicitly
indicating their sexual interest in her, it’s likely too late.
You must indicate some sort of sexual interest early on. Otherwise, the longer you wait, the
harder it gets and the more likely she will become Unreceptive to you.Again, ask yourself what
waiting four years to state your interest in a girl sub-communicates to her. It subcommunicates,
“I am so much more invested in you than in myself that I spent four years
working up the nerve to show you my interest.” It’s extremely unattractive. And chances are,
she’s known you’ve been interested the whole time but too afraid to show it, which in turn,
makes you even less attractive.
The second time-sink that men often get sucked into is women who are happily in a
relationship. Unlike the Friend Zone where men will often waste away months or years, a
woman in a relationship will usually only waste a few hours, or maybe a few weeks at the most.
But still, a time-sink is a time-sink.
A lot of men harbor the fantasy that any woman will cheat on her boyfriend/husband given the
right circumstance. This isn’t true.And even in the cases that it is true, it’s also not worth the
time or effort.
Research has shown that only about 30-40% of women will cheat at some point in their lives. It
also shows that women only cheat when they’re already unhappy with their relationships. My
experience has shown this to be true as well. I have never hooked up with a woman who was
married or had a boyfriend who was happy in her relationship when she decided to cheat. It
was only women who were incredibly unhappy with their relationships or who knew the
relationship was going to end anyway who did it. I had little to nothing to do with it.
The reason is simple: a woman who is happy in her relationship is going to be insanely
uninvested in the attention and affection she receives from other men. Like rock-bottom low.
Because these women are so lowly invested, it’s more or less impossible to be even less
invested than they are and develop attraction.
Add to that the friction of cheating and hiding the fact that you’re cheating, and a happily
married woman is more or less impossible to poach... unless she wants to be poached that is.
What a lot of men DON’T understand though is that often married or taken women will still flirt
with other men for no other reason than they think it’s fun and they like the attention. To some
women, flirting is like a hobby and they see it as harmless fun. If a woman is married or has a
boyfriend and seems pretty happy in general and is flirting with me, then I don’t take the flirting
too seriously.
Men also struggle a lot with the rejection, “I have a boyfriend.” Some men seem to get
obsessed about whether this is actually true or she’s just saying it to reject him.
Once again, it’s not about whether her statement is factual or not. It’s about her intention. The
intention is,“I’m not interested.”
Take that at face value and move on. Even if she doesn’t have a boyfriend, there’s no point in
trying to win over a girl who is willing to lie about something like that to you. And if she does
have a boyfriend, then she’s probably happy with him, otherwise she wouldn’t have brought it
up.
And that’s really the crux of the matter: women who have boyfriends/husbands who are willing
to cheat on them, don’t bring up their boyfriends/husbands... almost ever. Typically, you’ll hear
about them either immediately before or immediately after you hook up with them. If they tell
you about them right when you meet them, then they’re not interested. If they tell you about
their boyfriend while they’re making out with you in the cab back to your apartment, then she’s
probably interested.But you don’t need me to tell you that.
So your mission with Unreceptive women is to spot them as quickly as possible, and then
politely move on. Rejection in this case is often your friend, as we’ll see later.
It’s not until you find a woman who is Neutral or better that things begin to get interesting.
The goal with Neutral Women is to get them to stop being Neutral as soon as possible.As we
mentioned earlier, women who are Neutral and who stay Neutral tend to eventually end up
Unreceptive. The way to get them to become Receptive is to demonstrate that you’re less
invested than they are. You demonstrate this by expressing your vulnerability and your identity
to them freely.
When you express your truth to women, you will polarize them: they will either become
Receptive to you or they will make themselves Unreceptive. When you express your truth, if
you express more investment than them then they will be not be attracted and will therefore
be Unreceptive.Also, if you express your truth and there is a high amount of friction between
yourself and her that cannot be overcome, then she will become Unreceptive
If you express your truth and demonstrate not only that you’re confident but also frictionless
for her (similar interests, values, life situation, etc.), then she will become very Receptive. And
when I say very Receptive, I mean very.
A big misconception men have is that they need to behave in a way that makes EVERY
woman like them. This is counterproductive because by altering your behavior to fit whatever
she wants means you are hiding your truth, not being vulnerable and therefore are being overinvested
and unattractive.
Other men often stick to plain jokes and safe topics of conversation that end up not polarizing
at all for fear of being rejected. This is also a form of hiding one’s truth, not showing
vulnerability, being overinvested and therefore not being attractive.
This is the plight of the Nice Guy. He’s afraid of eliciting an emotional response in anybody,
especially women (and especially himself) therefore he’ll play it safe and elicit Neutral reactions
from woman after woman.And when women are Neutral for too long without being polarized,
then they will make themselves Unreceptive.
If there is one thing that False Confidence guys accomplish well, it’s that they will polarize
women quickly. Women will know more or less immediately if they’re interested in a False
Confidence guy or not because he will be so overbearing and imposing she’ll have no choice
than to feel something for him.
The problem with the False Confidence guy is that the few women who become Receptive to
him are not the type of women who are pleasant to be around (they’re highly invested and low
self-esteem).
As you can see, Neutral women are where so-called “game” comes into play. Having good
game means you can take a woman who is Neutral and incite her to become Receptive to you
quickly. You do this by making yourself vulnerable, sharing yourself unabashedly, and polarizing
her one way or the other and being comfortable with whichever result.
For instance, I recently met a beautiful woman in a nightclub. She danced with me, but ignored
my attempts to get closer to her. She seemed content to dance with me but was not investing
any effort in the interaction beyond that. Sensing that I could easily get stuck dancing with her
all night without actually getting anywhere, I offered to buy her a drink. I told her I'd like to get
to know her a bit better.She obliged.
At the bar the first question out of my mouth is one of my favorites for Neutral situations:
"What's your favorite thing in the world?"
This question will tell me two things: how passionate and self-aware she is about her own life
and secondly, if we have anything in common. Women who are not passionate or self-aware I
drop very quickly and go meet someone else. Women who share interests with me give me an
opportunity to polarize them quickly to being Receptive.
For instance, if a woman answers "Jesus," then I know I'm heading straight for Unreceptive
then and there. Not that I hate Jesus, but let’s just say I’m a bit of a hedonist. This polarization
is a good thing, even though it ends up with me not getting the girl in the end. We're both
better off not being together.
In this particular example at the nightclub, the woman answered traveling and experiencing
new cultures. Bingo. I love to travel. I've been to over 40 countries. I tell her this. Sure enough,
within 30 minutes, we were sitting alone together, enrapt in a conversation about grammar and
the Russian language.
Do Russian grammar lessons strike you as an effective pick up tactic? Probably not. But I dig it.
So did she.And eventually became my girlfriend. My success was about expressing my identity,
forcing her to make a decision about me and letting the chips fall where they may.
Finally, we have the Receptive women. Finding these are the best, because they require the
least amount of effort. You escalate. You make a move. You move things forward—assuming
you want to, of course.
Receptive women who were originally Neutral, if you do not make a move and become physical
with them quickly enough, they will often drift back to Neutral and then to Unreceptive
permanently. But I’ve found that women who are Receptive to you to begin with, will usually
stay Receptive almost indefinitely. I think these are the only rare occasions when you can
actually pry yourself out of the Friend Zone — these rare circumstances where she was
always Receptive to you, but for whatever reason, you two weren’t able to be together (you
had a girlfriend, she moved away for three years, etc.).
The percentage of women who are Receptive to you will increase proportionally to the quality
of your lifestyle, your social status and your looks. The percentage of women that you’re able
to move from Neutral to Receptive will be proportional to how good your “game” is, or how well
you’re able to communicate and express yourself with women.And your ability to sort through
each type of women and meet as many as possible will be determined by how fearless and
bold you are when it comes to meeting women.
(That last paragraph was important and the basis for the rest of this book, so you may want to
read it again and make sure you understand it.)
Most pick up advice obsesses over the avoidance of rejection. Rejection plays an integral part
in my strategy. It’s unavoidable, so I figure we may as well develop a strategy that uses it to
help us. Rejection exists for a reason. If you are a professor at a prestigious university, then
you’re probably not going to enjoy your time with a high school dropout with an alcohol
problem. Just because she has a nice ass doesn’t mean you want to be with her.
Polarizing women into rejecting us — and when I say us, I mean the real us, the vulnerable and
unabashed us — does us a favor by sorting which women are going to make us happy.
Men often want to have it both ways, they want to be able to avoid painful rejections, avoid
saying something stupid, avoid embarrassing themselves, while at the same time being this
attractive, amazing guy who women fall to their knees for.
You can’t have it both ways.
The two go together. You cannot be an attractive and life-changing presence to some women
without being a joke or an embarrassment to others. You simply can’t. You have to be
controversial.You have to polarize. It’s the name of the game.And getting good at the game is
learning to open yourself up enough emotionally, learning to express your honest self enough
and be comfortable enough with your vulnerability to take those embarrassing moments with
the moments of passion.A willingness to polarize is not easy. But it’s necessary. It’s why you’re
here right now.
Polarizing to Attract
Our primary strategy with women is polarization. The idea is that the more forthright you are
about who you are, how you feel, and what you think, the more this is going to weed out
Unreceptive Women from the Receptive women, as well as push Neutral women to get off the
fence and decide how they feel about you.
The amazing thing about polarization is that the simple act of doing it demonstrates True
Confidence and will then inspire more Neutral women to become Receptive than other
strategies or tactics.
Like I mentioned earlier, the most common strategy by men who are inexperienced with women
is “to be liked by all; hated by none.” But when it comes to being intimate and attracting
women, this is a horrible strategy. Being hated by nobody usually means you’re not loved by
anybody either.
The men who employ this strategy employ it because they’re trying to avoid confrontation and
controversy. Many of these men have been avoiding confrontation and controversy their entire
lives. It’s part of their fear of vulnerability.
The fact is that sexuality, attraction, and relationships are by their very nature confrontational
and controversial. You have to either make the decision to accept being controversial and
confrontational or you need to accept that you will go through life with everyone being Neutral
towards you.
Polarization is what occurs when you express your truth and make yourself vulnerable. When
you tell a woman she is beautiful, you are polarizing her. When you tease her about her
earrings and put your arm around her, you’re polarizing her. When you wear a custom-made
suit out you are polarizing women. When you tell a woman who’s late to a date to never be
late again, you are polarizing her. When you smile and tell her how beautiful she is, you’re
polarizing her. When you take her hand in yours and lead her somewhere, you are polarizing
her.
Everything that is attractive is polarizing.
These are never wrong moves, assuming that they are honest expressions of yourself and you
are showing your vulnerability.
A man who is highly invested is going to alter his behaviors based on the woman he’s talking
to. He’s going to be afraid to tell her that he doesn’t accept her being late. He’s going to be
afraid to wear that suit out. He’s going to be timid when he wants to put his arm around her.
He’s going to be unable to make himself vulnerable, express his truth, and will therefore not
polarize her.
A man who is uninhibited about expressing his emotions and what he wants will demonstrate
less investment and less neediness, thereby attracting a woman and immediately forcing her
to decide whether she’s Receptive or Unreceptive. And chances are, unless there’s a lot of
friction present, she will become Receptive. You’d be surprised how many women will respond
with attraction to nothing other than a man who is bold and willing to stick his neck out.
A lot of men assume that this means you are inviting a mountain of rejection onto you. The
surprising thing is this is rarely the case. Yes, you will get rejected when you polarize women.
And yes, every once in a while it will be a harsh rejection.
But surprisingly, a lot of women will react warmly to these advances, even if they’re not
interested and reject you. They respect a man who is bold and honest. I’ve had tons occasions
where I approached women boldly and honestly, stating directly that they were beautiful and I
wanted to meet them, and despite rejecting me they were so impressed by my boldness and
confidence that they promptly introduced me to a friend of theirs who was available.
I’ve often been thanked for hitting on women I’ve approached. And even when things go
nowhere, women at least respect me and the fact that I stand up for myself.
Most of the harsh rejections I’ve had in my life came from when I was performing, seeking
validation, was over-invested and unconfident, or pursuing with False Confidence. When I
pursue with True Confidence, almost every woman at the very least will respect my advances,
even if she’s not interested.
Remember, women are turned on by men who desire them. They are also turned on by the
behavior of high status. When you’re expressing your truth boldly and showing shameless
desire for her, you are demonstrating both qualities that turns her on.
Often women who had absolutely no interest in meeting you before will suddenly become
uncontrollably attracted around you.
In my experience, the more polarizing a man is, the more they are flooded with opportunities
with women. This is true for every man I know who is incredibly successful with meeting and
dating women. The biggest mental hurdle for many men is the ability to handle rejection.A lot
of men have had it ingrained into them all of their lives — and even by other dating advice —
that rejection is terrible and should be avoided at all costs. They buy into some myth that there
are magical lady’s men out there that don’t get rejected, ever.
And as we’ll see, this is not true.
Chapter 6: Rejection and Success
“I have failed over and over and over again in my life. And that is why I succeed.”
- Michael Jordan
T he first step to overcoming rejection is to accept you’re going to get rejected.Yes, it will suck.
But no, it’s not the end of the world.You’ll be fine.
I want you to tell yourself right now, “I’m going to be rejected a lot and it’s going to be fine.” Go
ahead, say it to yourself.See? Don’t you feel better already?
Business guru Dan Kennedy once said, “Your ability to deal with the failure will determine how
much you get to deal with success.”
My harshest rejection ever was in Austin, Texas, probably winter of 2007. I was out with my
best friend late on a Friday night. I see two cute girls dancing by themselves. I approach. I lightly
touch one on the shoulder and begin to speak.
She spins around, “GET THE FUCK AWAY FROM ME! DON’T YOU EVER FUCKING TOUCH
ME!”
“Whoa, chill out, I didn’t even do anything!” I try to blurt out between her shrieks. I’m not heard.
She shoves me while screaming. I grab her arms to try to calm her down.
The slap comes hard and fast. Totally uncalled for. “GET THE FUCK AWAY FROM ME! DON’T
YOU EVER FUCKING TOUCH ME AGAIN!”
Before I know it bouncers are removing me from the bar.
“I didn’t even do anything, I don’t even know her,” I say.
“Yeah, whatever buddy.”
It’d be weeks before I’d work up the courage to approach again.
Another night, another bar. This was probably some time in 2006. I’m talking to a super-cute
blonde. College girl. Sorority. Ditsy as hell and a true pain to interact with. You know those
people who interrupt you constantly and redirect every possible topic of conversation back to
some inane story about themselves? She was one of those. It was like being socially waterboarded.
But she was hot. And I was inexperienced and over-invested and crazy horny and honestly
had nothing better to do.So I talked to her, painfully and begrudgingly.
Somewhere in between trying to decide whether to drown myself in alcohol, to drown her in
alcohol, to stab myself in the face with a broken beer bottle or to stab her … she let loose this
little gem:
“By the way, thanks for not being ugly.”
I disregarded the compliment and honed in on what was so shallow, so immature, I just couldn’t
stand by idly any longer.
“Excuse me?” I asked.
”I said, thanks for not being ugly.”
I imagine my mouth fell open here. But of course she missed my incredulity and continued on
with her monologue.She was good at monologues.
“See, no offense, but talking to guys in bars is so boring. And tonight, nothing but these
hideously ugly guys have been talking to me and buying me drinks. But at least you’re not
ugly.”
At least?
She continues: “To be honest, I can’t stand ugly people. Like it seriously hurts my soul to look
at ugly people. Like I honestly feel physical pain if I have to look at an ugly person.”
I couldn’t hold back anymore,“You must not own any mirrors then.”
Her face: disbelief, horror, then anger — in that order, half a second max — then her fruity drink
came flying onto my face, followed by a dainty slap.
“Asshole!”
She stormed back to her friends.
When I first started going out and trying to pick up girls, I used to be horrified at the thought of
something like the above stories happening to me. The idea of getting slapped or a drink
thrown on me, or getting thrown out of a bar, these were all nightmares that would probably
have visibly shaken me at the thought of them happening. Maybe you feel the same way right
now.
But both of these memories are still bright in my mind, as they’re some of the most important
learning experiences I had — even more important than many of my successes.
Believe it or not, being slapped by these women taught me a lot about attraction, as much as
anything else that I’ve experienced. For starters, being slapped by a woman is not the end of
the world, or even of the interaction. It’s simply an emotional response. And as a highly
emotional response, I’ll always take being slapped over indifference or boredom any day. It’s
polarizing.And polarizing women is more important than being pleasant to them.
Being slapped also taught me that you can’t always control how people react to you. Some
people are completely out of their minds or they behave very inappropriately. You can’t help
this. You cannot control what happens in every interaction. The sooner you accept this, the
better off you will be.
Sometimes you’ll deserve being rejected. Sometimes you won’t. I don’t regret what I said to the
sorority girl. In hindsight, I didn’t need to be rude to her – if that happened today, I’d just excuse
myself and walk away – but I was standing up for my values and decided that I wasn’t going to
put up with offensive behavior just to get a date.
As with any type of failure, it’s not until you’ve been rejected a certain amount that you realize
how insignificant it actually is, how you spent so much time worrying about nothing, and how
you’re free to act however you choose.
When I started this journey, I was as scared of rejection as just about anyone I’ve ever met. I
had terrible approach anxiety. I was the consummate Nice Guy, always trying to keep things
smooth and pleasant.
The reason men fear rejection is because they’re operating on other peoples’ truths, not their
own. In fact, men who fear rejection tend to be oblivious to their own truth because if they
were aware of their own desires, needs and values, what would they have to be afraid of? Why
would they ever hesitate to expose their vulnerability to others?
Most men with weak grasps of their own truth fantasize about the ability to never be rejected,
ever. Not only is this a manifestation of their insecurity, but it’s unrealistic. Being rejected saves
me so much time and effort. If I had to go on a date with every single girl I found even mildly
attractive, I’d probably lose my mind.
It’s Usually Not About You
As soon as you realize that 95% of this “picking up” women stuff has nothing to do with you, is
the moment you become free to pursue what you want without hesitation or fear.
When you get out there and start meeting a lot of women, you’ll begin to notice that there’s a
lot to be said about “meeting the right person at the wrong time.” I can’t tell you how many
times I’ve met an amazing woman but some circumstance was standing in the way. It happens
all the time. It may be that she’s on vacation and flying 2,000 miles home tomorrow so she
doesn’t want to bother meeting a new guy. Or that she just got back together with her longterm
boyfriend and doesn’t want to screw it up. Or that her dog just died and she really doesn’t
feel like talking tonight. Or that her ex-boyfriend has been calling her and harassing her and
she just wants to be left alone with her girlfriends tonight. Or that the last guy who came up
and talked to her grabbed her ass so she’s upset. Or the guy she went out with last night was
totally rude and looked just like you. Or it’s that time of the month and she’s irritable and
annoyed with the whole “dating” thing right now.
There are a million extraneous circumstances completely outside of your control and at any
given time, a large chunk of the women you meet and talk to are going to be experiencing one
of them. The best you can do is to let it go and remember: it’s not about you.
This is why we approach based on our truth. This is why we polarize women as soon as
possible. This is why we approach women looking to see if she fits our values and needs and
not the other way around.
Most men, when they approach women, are thinking something like, “I hope she likes me,” or “I
hope she doesn’t embarrass me or reject me.” It’s all about them. And therefore, when things
don’t go anywhere, the men take it personally — they get upset or angry or butt-hurt that this
random stranger with breasts isn’t interested right now.
But as we’ve learned, there are an infinite number of extraneous circumstances that we can’t
control, and we already know that the vast majority of women aren’t compatible with us in any
significant way anyway.So we must remove ourselves from the equation.
Instead of thinking,“I wonder if she’ll like me,” think,“I wonder what she’s like?”
Instead of thinking, “I hope she doesn’t reject me,” think, “I hope I'll have an interesting
experience with her.”
The beauty is that whether she falls in love with you on the spot or she throws a drink in your
face… you’ve succeeded.You’ve found out the truth.Your curiosity is fulfilled and you can now
decide whether you should move on or not.
This mindset is easier said than done.All of Part IV is devoted to learning how to put this into
practice in your life.
But ultimately, I see every rejection simply as an incompatibility. Whether she thinks I’m a total
creep, or she’s crazy about me but we live on different continents, or she’s in a horrible mood
when I ask her out, or she thinks I’m cute but has different values and interests than me –
whatever the reason, if a woman ever rejects me, it’s because she’s not compatible with me. It
may be a permanent incompatibility. It may be a temporary incompatibility. But the point is that
if she liked me enough, she’d be willing to work at making it happen with me.And if she doesn’t,
then that just means it’s wrong person or right person, wrong time.And that’s fine.
Remember, it’s “Fuck Yes!” or no.And if I’m not getting a “Fuck Yes!” then I’d much rather have
a no than a “Meh, OK.”
Men Who Only Experience Rejection
There are a minority of men who experience only rejection with all of the women they meet.
These men have met many women and come home empty-handed time and time again.
Often, they’ve tried to use ineffectual pick up techniques and tactics, dressed up, and adopted
entire philosophies that didn’t suit them.
Without fail, every single man I meet who receives ONLY rejection is receiving it because he is
nowhere near his truth. He is emotionally oblivious to his own needs and desires and is
therefore unable to communicate or connect.
Sometimes these men meet hundreds of women over the course of years and never get
anywhere with them. Often these men are decentlooking, successful and smart and seem to
have their lives together. But literally not a single woman they meet is interested in them. How
can this be?
My contention is that these men are severely disassociated from their true identity. They’ve
got massive amounts of emotional baggage that they’re oblivious to, yet it permeates all of
their interactions. They have a horrible lack of self-awareness of the emotional needs that are
motivating them. Their life and actions are built on conditionality:
I have this job so that people will respect me. I approach these women so that I can feel
important. I want to have sex with hot girls to know that I’m valuable.
These men base all of their behavior and interests on what they think will get them approval,
which as we’ve learned, is the ultimate repellent to women.
But worst of all, these men tend to lack an ability to integrate feedback. So for instance, if they
approach a few women with a technique that they read online and these women all tell him
that they find him creepy and awkward, instead of evaluating why the women found them
creepy and weird, they decide that the technique must not work and move on to try another
one.
It's never their fault, it's the technique's fault, or the woman's fault, or society's fault, or
whatever else. Admitting they are at fault would mean accepting responsibility for changing.
And taking responsibility to change would me opening up themselves inside and taking a look
at their own neediness and why they’re so invested in the approval of others all the time.
Remember: when in doubt, check your intentions. These men never check their intentions.
Instead, they change what they’re saying, over and over.
They never stop to consider that the woman was telling them that their intentions and
neediness — their complete inability to be vulnerable and to show their truth — is what is
creepy, not what they actually said.
Unfortunately, these men are usually beyond help within dating advice. When I tell them what
I’ve written here, they always respond with, “I know why I want these women, I’ve got my life
together. I’m confident, yet nothing works.” And always, every time, when you dig deep enough,
there’s something there.
One client I had, after years of no results, finally got talking about his mother’s death and how
cold it made his relationship with his father. His issue with women had always been that he
was unwilling to express any sort of sexual intent towards them whatsoever. In a way, he had
been worshipping them.
Another client would regularly act outlandish and childish doing silly dances for attention. Sure,
he got attention and a lot of laughs, but he had never developed the ability to actual share
himself genuinely in a social situation. He had always been the awkward, nerdy kid growing up.
The way he survived high school and college was by being goofy and making other people
laugh.But as an adult, that was no longer working.
Redefining Success
The concept of “success” in modern dating advice is often skewed. It’s influenced on the one
side from traditional roles and rules — get a nice girlfriend, get married, etc. — and on the other
side by unrealistic expectations and social pressures by other men — to be “the man” you
have to bed dozens of women, that you should never be rejected, you should be banging
models and “10’s,” etc.
The traditional advice would tell you that “success” with women isn’t determined by you, but
by the women themselves. Women alone choose which men “have it,” while others are left to
pick up the leftovers. Other conventional wisdom tells us that success with women is
determined by wealth and looks. All of these things certainly play a role (as we’ll see), but to
define our success by it is a bit extreme and short-sighted. Men put a lot of pressure on one
another and shame one another for being rejected.
Even within dating advice and the so-called “dating science” of Pick Up Artists, they create
metrics like open-to-close ratios, hook percentages and other esoteric numbers that are
meant to measure your “success” of meeting and dating women as a “skill.” Some men track
how many women they talk to, kiss or even sleep with… going so far as to even keep
spreadsheets.
Measuring progress is one thing, but the problem arises when these metrics — lay counts,
flake percentages, etc. — become confused as success in and of themselves, rather than part
of the process.
Choosing how we define success with women is vitally important. If you choose the wrong way
to define success for yourself, then the months or years of effort you go into achieving that
goal will go to waste.
For instance, men who define success for themselves as how many women they can have sex
with will waste away time pursuing and manipulating women whom they don’t necessarily
enjoy or aren’t even that attracted to in the name of achieving the “success” which they’ve
defined for themselves.
This isn’t a shooting range we’re on here. We’re talking about the health of our emotional lives.
Women and our relationships are one and the same with our emotional health, and so the way
in which we perceive women and relationships is going to be reflected in our emotional wellbeing.
If you choose to believe “success” with women is determined by which woman chooses you or
how much money you can provide… well, then there’s a good chance you’re going to be quite
lonely followed by ending up with the nearest woman capable of tolerating you for a lifetime.
If you choose to believe “success” with women is a lay-count, or other statistical data, then
your love life will become just as objectified as the women you meet… and although you’ll have
the quantity of interactions to back you up on paper, all emotional quality will be lost, along
with your happiness.
I define success in a qualitative way: maximizing happiness with whichever woman (or women)
for each individual.
Success = Maximizing happiness with whichever woman/women we prefer
This may seem like an obvious statement, but the implications are actually quite profound. For
most of the men in the world, their “success” with women is defined by:
- Never being rejected.
- Dating a woman who is more attractive than his friends’ girlfriends.
- How many women they can approach or have a date with.
- Quantity of women rather than quality of women.
- If she fits the stereotype of what “beauty” is.
- If she’s the kind of woman you’ve been raised to think you should date.
When we define success as finding the woman/women who will maximize our happiness, our
approach takes a completely new light. Instead of waiting and hoping for a woman to select us,
instead of racking up numbers, instead of winning bragging rights, instead of avoiding
rejections — our success is defined by screening through as many women as possible until we
find the ones we enjoy.
Suddenly, rejection goes from hurting our success rate to often helping it. Having a great date
with a woman who wants to wait to have sex with you can become a far greater success than
that woman who bangs your brains out an hour after meeting you.
We screen through these women by polarizing them. We are polarizing them by sharing our
truth with them openly and freely. And when we do this, women will either become incredibly
attracted to us or they will reject us.Either way, we’ll be the happier for it.
And not only do we pursue and polarize the women we believe will make us happy, but we
push the interaction. Some men become satisfied with how many women they can kiss or how
many phone numbers they can collect. This is not success. This is not success because you
are not maximizing your relationships with these women. These metrics are part of the
process. There is no happiness inherent in owning more phone numbers than anyone else.
You’re chasing validation, not fulfillment. You are not dating them, sleeping with them,
becoming intimate with them or even committing to them. Get out there and expose yourself.
Open yourself up and find what makes you happy. Yes, that will mean you’ll probably get hurt.
But so what? The best things in life don’t come easily.
So it’s time to get into the nitty-gritty. So far we’ve spent most of the book being introspective
and talking about our emotional lives. Whether we get any specific woman or not depends on
our level of of investment relative to our investment in ourselves. This is True Confidence. We
build True Confidence by showing our vulnerability freely. We express our vulnerability by being
honest.
There are three ways in which we are honest.And those three ways will make up the bulk of
this book. The three ways are 1) living based on our values (lifestyle); 2) becoming comfortable
with our intentions (boldness); and 3) by expressing our sexuality freely (communication).
The first way of expressing our truth involves developing a lifestyle that makes us happy. The
second way of expressing truth is by being courageous and fighting through our fears and
anxieties.And the third way of expressing truth is by communicating well and being uninhibited
in our sexuality.
Choosing to not live a lifestyle based on our values and interests is a dishonesty to ourselves.
It reflects a higher investment in other’s than in oneself. Therefore it is unattractive.
Not acting on our desires and asserting ourselves where appropriate is showing more
investment in others than ourselves. It is therefore unattractive.
And not communicating our thoughts, feelings and desires freely and clearly also
demonstrates more investment in others than in ourselves. This is also unattractive.
Lifestyle, Courage, and Communication: Irefer to these as the Three Fundamentals.
Chapter 7: The Three Fundamentals
T he Three Fundamentals are the three ways in which a man can find his truth and become
more confident. Improving each one of the Three Fundamentals will improve your results,
sometimes drastically. Each of the Three Fundamentals can be worked on independently, but
as we’ll see later, improving one of the three often indirectly benefits the other two and viceversa.
The Three Fundamentals are:
Creating an attractive and enriching lifestyle.
Overcoming your fears and anxiety around women.
Mastering the expression of your emotions and communicating fluidly.
The way to improve each of these fundamentals is by drilling deeper into your vulnerability in
each one of them. So one way to think about it is that the fundamentals are the categories in
which you can improve your results with women (and general well-being), and expressing your
vulnerability and seeking truth is the process in which you improve in the categories.
For short, I refer to the Three Fundamentals as: Honest Living, Honest Action, and Honest
Communication.
For instance, Honest Living, or creating an attractive lifestyle involves really drilling down and
understanding what you want as a man for your life and then working to make that a reality. If
you’re in a job you hate with hobbies you hate and friends you don’t like, then no matter what
you do or how much money you make, you’re going to have a hard time meeting attractive
women that you enjoy and who enjoy being with you. There are specific reasons for this that
we’ll get into, but the overarching reason is that you are not living your life honestly with
yourself, which means you’re not investing in yourself, which means you’re not confident or
attractive.
If your true passion is art and you push paper around at an insurance firm, then you’re not living
honestly with yourself. You’ve compromised your identity in some way to fit what others have
dictated it should be — in this case, you’ve given up what actually makes you happy in order to
fit the values or roles of other people in society (having a stable job, working in the corporate
world, having a nice house/car, etc.) This displays a lack of vulnerability and a lot of neediness.
If those things aren’t actually important to you, then you have a responsibility to yourself to
change. Otherwise, you’re always going to be an unattractive man. How so? Because you’re
living 40 hours a week, every week, investing your identity in what others want of you and not
what you want of yourself. This is like baseline confidence, and until you straighten this out,
you will be unconfident with every woman you meet, preventing you from meeting the truly
amazing women that you could potentially be with one day.
Honest Living correlates directly with the quality of women that you will attract. The more intune
you are to your lifestyle, the more you take care of your appearance and your health, the
higher quality of women you will attract and the greater percentage of Receptive women you’ll
meet.
Honest Action is overcoming your fear and anxiety around women. Our anxiety is another form
in which we highly invest ourselves in others and avoid our truth. Like a poor lifestyle, it also
seems to almost be embedded in us and something that requires a lot of thought and effort to
repair over a longer period of time.
I call it Honest Action because it is honesty in the strictest terms: if you see a beautiful woman
and have a desire to meet her, to not take action and meet her is a form of dishonesty to
yourself. If you’re standing in a bar, and you see a cute girl, and you keep looking at her all night
afraid to do something, on a deep level, you’re being dishonest to your intentions and sexuality.
You’re being overly-invested in her and others’ opinions and are unable to expose your
vulnerability. All fear around your sexuality is a result of feeling inferior or unworthy. If you’re
afraid to approach a woman, it’s because somewhere inside you are more invested in her
opinion of you than you are in your own opinion of yourself. If you’re afraid to ask a girl to come
home with you, it’s because you are afraid of the sexual reality that you want to sleep with her
— you’re more invested in her not rejecting you than you are in aligning yourself with your
desires.
Overcoming your fear and anxiety probably has the greatest correlation with a man’s overall
results with women. The reason being, once a man overcomes his fear of rejection, he’s willing
to more or less pursue any woman he wants when he wants. Even if he’s a deadbeat (lacks a
good lifestyle) or even if he’s terrible at expressing himself (lacks good communication skills), he
will eventually meet women who want to date him and sleep with him by no other means than
pure numbers. If he’s willing to approach 500 women with no fear of rejection, eventually at
least one of them is going to stick.
Honest Action correlates directly to the quantity of women you meet and attract.
The third fundamental is Honest Communication, or learning to express yourself freely and
effectively. This is what most dating advice sells and classifies as “game:” a good sense of
humor, the ability to connect with people, telling stories, engaging people’s attention, having
charisma, and expressing your sexuality openly. These are all parts of this fundamental.
I call it Honest Communication because it’s learning how to communicate your true intentions
and emotions to others clearly. Often we have certain thoughts or feelings, but we don’t know
the best way to convey those thoughts or feelings — this third fundamental focuses on how
to do that.
Honest Communication will determine the efficiency with which you are able to attract women
as well as the compatibility of women you seduce. What I mean by efficiency in seducing is that
a man with poor communication skills may have 10 women attracted to him, but because he
can’t convey his thoughts and emotions well, he’ll only end up succeeding with one of them.
On the other hand, a man who communicates superbly may convert seven or eight of those 10
women into becoming sexually involved with him.
Natural Advantages/Disadvantages
Chances are, you’re already pretty strong in one or more of the Three Fundamentals and weak
or mediocre at one or more of them. Where your strengths and weaknesses lie will determine
not just the quantity of your results with women, but also the types of results you achieve.
For instance, a man with an amazing lifestyle, but poor action and poor communication will be
surrounded by beautiful and interesting women but never be with them. Classic examples of
this are rich or goodlooking men who are still single and frustrated. They may have money,
connections, power and meet beautiful women regularly (or have beautiful women approach
them), but they’re never able to capitalize on their opportunities.
A man with no fear or anxiety with women will be able to approach and ask out many women,
but his effort/reward ratio will be poor and the quality of women will be worse. Often a lot of
aspiring players fall into this category — they go out 5-6 nights per week, approach dozens of
women, fail with almost all of them, but every once in a while convince a drunk sloppy girl to
come home with them.
A man with great communication skills but a lot of fear and a poor lifestyle will rarely meet or
attract beautiful women, but the few times he does, he will capitalize on his few opportunities.
Most so-called “normal” are like this. They rarely see opportunities, but when they come along,
they take them and do well. The problem with these men is that they never feel like they’re in
control of their love lives. They’re always waiting for that next woman who’s interested to
come around.And sometimes they end up waiting quite a while.
The Three Fundamentals are interesting in that they explain why a lot of men implement a lot
of dating advice or self-improvement and don’t see any actual change in results. If your
weakness is that you aren’t able to communicate coherently or empathize with what other
people are expressing, then being encouraged to approach 500 new women is going to be an
absolute disaster.
If you are broke, live with your parents, and have no job, then being encouraged to spend all of
your time and money out in night clubs is only going to get you a bunch of meaningless sex
with mediocre drunk girls who have no better options.
If you are scared to death of saying anything to a woman you find attractive, then the best
conversation tricks, teasing and flirting lines, or even openers are not going to help you at all.
But as I said earlier, the Three Fundamentals are interdependent — they feed off of one
another. So if your biggest problem is an inability to communicate well, then approaching 500
women won’t directly benefit you, but the fact that you’re talking to 500 new people will
indirectly help your issue. In the same way, being able to communicate effectively will help guys
with extreme levels of anxiety in their development because the few times they do work up the
nerve to make a move on women, they will usually do it in a smooth and sociallyattuned way.
It’s important to cater the advice that you implement to your specific issues. Hopefully reading
this chapter, you have at least a vague idea of where your weaknesses are. The rest of this
book is dedicated to breaking down each of the Fundamentals individually and giving clear
how-to guides for improving them. Identifying and focusing on the fundamental(s) you need to
work on most will be the quickest route to improving your love life and sex life. Most of you will
have one or two main weaknesses and probably one natural strength.But some of you may be
weak in all of them. I guarantee you, if you’re reading this, you are not strong in all of them. If
you think you are and are still reading this far, then you’re deluding yourself and need to reread
Chapter 4 on being honest with yourself.
Two Types of Men
In my experience, almost all men who struggle with relationships fall into one of two categories:
socially-anxious or socially-disconnected.
Socially-anxious men tend to have the third fundamental down very well. They’re good at
expressing themselves and are very aware of social norms and what others are
thinking/feeling. In fact, in a lot of cases socially-anxious guys are TOO aware of what other
people are thinking and feeling and therefore have a lot of social anxiety. They’re afraid to
approach new women. They get nervous pushing things forward. They’re scared to ask
women on dates.
Generally though, once these men do meet a woman who likes them, they do OK. They can
converse with her all night. And if she happens to be attracted to him, he’s not such a mess.
But it’s the actual being pro-active and making a move that scares him to death. These men
usually spend most of their time focusing on overcoming fear and little time on expression.
Socially-disconnected men are the opposite. These are men who have always been a little bit
“oblivious” to what others think and feel around them. Usually they’re guys who have always
kind of kept to themselves and grew up more interested in their studies or some nerdy subject
than the people around them.
Interestingly, men who are socially-disconnected have far less fear or anxiety when it comes to
approaching, pursuing or escalating with women. In fact, it’s because they’re so oblivious to
social cues and what others are thinking/feeling that they are so fearless around them.
The struggle for men in this category is going to be the third fundamental: learning how to
express themselves and understand how people think and feel around them. These men have
little hesitance or fear for action, but they tend to do the wrong actions at the wrong times
over and over and over, and rarely understand why.
The first fundamental (lifestyle) is all over the map and is a work-inprogress for everyone. The
better your lifestyle, the easier everything else will be. But the second and third fundamentals
are intimately connected to one another: anxious guys are anxious because they’re so socially
attuned to others (perhaps even too socially in tune with others) and social disconnects are
fearless because they are socially disconnected from others.
The idea is to become socially connected and fearless at the same time and have an
awesome and attractive lifestyle. The full package. The Three Fundamentals.
But whichever type you are, read all three sections, as even reading about areas in which
you’re naturally strong will reinforce your positive habits. And you will probably pick up a few
minor pointers on how to improve your strengths even further.
Part III is about Honest Living — building an attractive and abundant lifestyle so that quality
women who are most compatible with you naturally gravitate into your life.
Part IV is about Honest Action — overcoming your fears and anxieties so that you may act on
your impulses and desires without hesitation or shame.
Part V is about Honest Communication — training you to express yourself openly and
effectively in a dynamic and interesting way that will keep women interested in you and help
you make that transition to becoming physical with them.
Parts III and IV are divided into two chapters each. The first covers the concepts and ideas of
that fundamental and the second gives specific, actionable advice on how to improve that
fundamental. For instance, in Part III (Honest Living), Chapter 8 covers the concept of
Demographics and how it affects how women are going to respond to you. Chapter 9 is called
“How to Be Attractive" and describes how we can use the knowledge of demographics to
make ourselves as attractive as possible to each woman we meet.
Part V has four chapters to cover all aspects of communicating efficiently (verbally, physically,
etc.) as well as what’s socially expected in the courtship process.
And keep in mind moving forward that the foundation behind all of the advice given is the idea
that an honest expression of yourself and your desires as a man is the most effective way to
demonstrate nonneediness and to therefore create lasting and genuine attraction with
women who will make you the happiest.
If at any point along the first seven chapters, you felt like something didn’t make sense or
didn’t “click,” then you may want to flip back and review it. If not, if everything makes sense and
the reasoning behind everything I’ve said so far makes sense, then you’re ready. Read on...
Part III: Honest Living
Chapter 8: Demographics
“Man sacrifices his health in order to make money. Then he sacrifices his money to recuperate
his health. And then he is so anxious about the future that he does not enjoy the present; the
result being that he does not live in the present or the future; he lives as if he is never going to
die, and then dies having never really lived.”
- The Dalai Lama
B efore we get into what to say to women, how to make them laugh, where to take them, how
to kiss them; before we even get into basic questions like what to wear, or how to look, what to
say first, we have to ask a more important question.A question whose answer will affect and
change everything listed above.
Which women do you want to meet and what kind of relationship do you want to have with
them?
Context. You can meet a woman in a coffee shop, but whether it’s a cold approach, business
networking event, or a speed-dating event is going to make a huge difference.
This question of where and in what context you meet women is what I call demographics, and
it is by-and-large ignored by pretty much all dating advice out there today. This absolutely
boggles my mind since social interactions are always contextual and therefore attracting
women is always contextual.
Some dating advice tells a 40-year-old divorced banker meeting women at an art gallery the
same advice that they tell a 19-year-old college kid sneaking into house parties. This is stupid.
These two men have completely different priorities, life experiences, personalities and
interests, and the women they’re going to meet in those two locations are going to be different
in age, education, values, emotional development, appearance and interests. That some
advice would give these men the exact same lines or strategies to use just goes to show how
completely out of tune a lot of men’s dating advice and pick up theory is today.
In fact, time has shown me that great swaths of men have become disgruntled and repeatedly
unsuccessful with a lot of this advice, and I think most of this vast lack of success can be
attributed to ignoring demographics.
The theory of demographics is simple and easy to remember: like attracts like. You attract
what you are.
If you’re a successful professional who likes fine wine, studied abroad and dresses well,
chances are the type of women you’re going to naturally meet and attract in your everyday life
are going to be similarly-educated, similar-looking women with similar interests and similar
success.
When demographics don’t match up, then it causes friction. And as we learned in Chapter 4,
friction prevents attraction from turning into sex and intimacy.
A common demographic mismatch scenario is the bookworm who takes up pick up lines and
tactics. Let’s say we have a 35-year-old engineer named John. John has been a bookworm and
shut-in all his life. He’s had two serious girlfriends, both lasting more than five years apiece.
He’s recently single and has decided that he wants to date and meet as many women as
possible before he gets married. So John reads some pick up material and begins hitting the
nightclubs with it.
Now, let’s ignore the lines he uses for a moment — in fact, let’s assume the lines he uses are
good (even though they’re probably not). He approaches a very hot blond girl named Jenna.
Jenna is 20-years-old and in her second year at community college. She comes from a worse
part of town and has been working a retail job at a shoe store for the last five years to put her
through community college, although she doesn’t like anything she’s learning. Her only relief is
when she gets to go party at the club each weekend where all of her friends are and where
she gets to revel in really hot guys hitting on her and buying her drinks.
John has three degrees, has spent the last eight years working 60 hours per week and never
drinks. He’s maybe been to 20 parties in his entire life and has only been drunk twice. He’s
passive and analytical and his sense of humor is highly intellectual. He’s soft-spoken and
thoughtful. He’s not dressed entirely well and his hair is unkempt. He wears big glasses and is
slightly shorter than average.
It’s not hard to see that when he meets Jenna, no matter what he says or what line he uses,
it’s going to end quickly, and chances are Jenna is not going to be subtle about her lack of
interest in John.
John may come away blaming the lines he used for not working. Or he may blame himself for
being ugly or being a little short.
But let’s keep the thought experiment going. Let’s say two years go by. In those two years
John works on himself. He dresses impeccably now — wearing tailored designer clothing that is
not only stylish but reflects his successful business persona. He’s well groomed. He’s gone to
the gym and buffed up, gotten contacts instead of glasses and paid a hair stylist to fix up his
hair.
John’s also discovered the fun of partying. He enjoys going out with some of his new young
professional friends to drink and dance and have fun. He’s begun spending more time at the
beach and has been teaching himself the guitar on and off. He’s gotten laid a few times and
realized that attractive women aren’t such a big deal to get worked up about. His confidence
has soared, and his lifestyle has expanded and grown.
Jenna has also changed in the past two years. Since she last met John, she’s dedicated
herself to her studies. She just got into nursing school and has been taking it seriously and
realizes she’s smarter than she thought she was and that at times she actually enjoys
learning. She also got out of a one-year relationship with a football player who was
irresponsible and treated her like crap. She’s realized that she needs a man who is more
responsible than she is.
This time when John approaches her (lines or not), they suddenly have an overlapping
demographic: John is now an attractive, well-kept, successful bachelor who knows how to let
loose, have fun and express his emotions; Jenna is now not only beautiful but also responsible,
ambitious and confident.
And like that, there’s now mutual attraction.
Now, it’s true that if John practiced and perfected his use of lines and tactics, he may be able
to convince Jenna in the short-term that he’s less invested and is actually in her demographic
(vague stories about his stripper ex-girlfriends and the like), but hopefully by now you realize
how badly these kinds of strategies backfire, particularly in the long-run. Eventually John’s lines
will run out and like Cinderella after the ball, Jenna will be horrified at who she’s actually talking
to.
But because John (and Jenna) worked on themselves, broadened their demographics, enriched
their lifestyles, and lived their lives how they wanted even more, they came to find enough
overlap and commonality to be attracted to one another.
This is the power of demographics.
And notice it has little to do with the people themselves whether they’re attracted to each
other, but more to do with timing. Two years prior they were not compatible. Two years later,
they are. This supports the idea that there’s no such thing as rejection, just incompatibilities.
If she loves to ski and ride horses, and you hate the outdoors and traveling, then that’s going
to cause friction — perhaps not immediately, but at some point.
If she values having fun, expressing her emotions openly and what her friends think of her, and
you value serious conversation, intellectual pursuits and don’t care much for social gatherings,
there’s going to be a large amount of friction from the get-go.
This is unavoidable. Pick up lines won’t change it. Being good-looking won’t change it. Being
rich won’t change it. If you hate what she loves and she hates what you love, it’s not going to
go anywhere.Period.
If she dedicates a lot of time and effort to her appearance and enjoys getting attention from
good-looking guys, and you don’t shower, dress poorly and haven’t ever seen the inside of a
gym, then there is going to be a large amount of friction.
These are the cold, hard facts. Nobody probably tells you this. But it’s obvious and it’s true.
Sorry.
The answer isn’t replacing your identity and passions, the answer is to expand your identity
and passions. Expand it to include new and interesting activities, new modes of expression,
and new ways of presenting yourself.
Demographics explain why sometimes you meet women you just “click” with, and more often
than not, you meet these women in situations where you’re having fun and doing what you
love.
Lifestyle Choices
The theory of demographics has advantages as well: if you play to your strengths, i.e., if you
focus your time and energy on meeting women in situations where they are likely to share your
values, interests and needs, then you’re going to not only experience a much higher degree of
success, but you’re going to meet women you enjoy a lot more.
For instance, I love to travel. And I love meeting women who love to travel. It’s absolutely my
favorite thing to talk about and typically if I find a well-traveled woman, I find it very easy to
attract her and date her.
When I’m in a random bar in Texas, I rarely meet women who have traveled. But when I go to a
European wine-tasting in New York, I almost meet nothing but women who love to travel.
Or even better, if I actually get up and go to another country and meet other people traveling
in that country, I’m going to have an extremely high hit-rate with those women.
If you love dancing or different types of music, then chances are the women you’re going to
meet at various dance events and concerts are going to be more compatible with you and
you’re going to have much more success with them.
Bars and nightclubs are generally considered “meet markets” or the obvious places everyone
goes to meet someone. But think about the people and context in which you’re walking into in
a bar or nightclub: a high-energy, generic party situation, where people value having fun and
spending time with their friends.
Assuming you’re a guy who loves to party, have fun and hang out with a bunch of new friends,
that’s great. But if you’re not that naturally outgoing social type, then chances are you’re not
going to be very compatible with most of the people there.
It isn’t until you develop that aspect of your personality or lifestyle that those women will begin
to open up to you.
What I recommend to every man before he even begins talking to women is to sit down for a
while and ask himself some questions:
- What do you value in a woman? Honesty? Affection? Intelligence?
Curiosity? Similar interests? Education?
- Women with the traits that you value, where do they frequent? Where
are you most likely to find them?
- What do you enjoy doing most? Do you love to read/write? Do you
play music? Do you enjoy sports and competitions? What are events
or organizations that you can become involved in that explore your
hobbies?
- If you don’t know what your passions and interests are, take a minute
and write down things that you’ve always wanted to do but have
never had the time or never worked up the nerve to do. Make a
promise to yourself to get involved in that activity or event in some
way.
Obviously, not every interest is going to be overflowing with women. If you are a competitive
chess player, you probably will not meet many women at chess tournaments. But few people
have only one passion or interest. And chances are that you have at least a few things that
you’re interested in that are overflowing with women.
Here are examples of some great hobbies/events that you can use to meet women:
- Dance classes (salsa, swing, ballroom, etc.)
- Political organizations or events
- Concerts and concert promotions
- Amateur sports leagues (ultimate frisbee and co-ed volleyball tend to have a lot of women; in
good shape too)
- Volunteering, charities, charities events (usually overloaded with great women)
- Training courses (leadership, public speaking)
- Cooking classes
- Yoga classes (a goldmine)
- Meditation courses and retreats
- Self-help seminars and educational events
- Travel groups (i.e., couchsurfing)
- For the religious: a church or whatever your faith’s equivalent is
- Educational classes (foreign language, CPA, etc.)
- Dog parks
- Wine or beer tastings
- Art galleries, exhibits or showings
- Business networking events
Also, meetup.com and livingsocial.com are excellent resources for finding like-minded people
and cool events going on in your city.
I have a friend over 40 who regularly dates women 15-20 years younger than him. He’s an
excellent dancer and goes to the local dance events in the Bay area every week. He’s
successful, smart and professional. He’s cultured and well-traveled. He also networks through
European entrepreneurs living and working in the US. Between these two groups he meets
tons of people and tons of attractive, intelligent women. To kick things off, he often brings
them together by hosting events at his house. His huge success (for a man his age) comes not
just from his charisma and his “game,” but the fact that he’s narrowed down the demographic
of women who he likes and who are apt to like him and acts on it.
A much simpler example is another friend I have who is a professional musician. You would
think he’d be getting laid all the time, but he actually spent most of his time in the studio and
rehearsal rooms. That’s where the real payday was.
But when he became single again, he began taking cheap and easy gigs, playing weddings,
dive bars, in cover bands, etc. and quickly met more women than he knew what to do with.
In my own life, I have a strong passion for traveling and culture. Wherever I go, I make a point to
join local events or classes where I’ll meet other like-minded people who also travel. When I’m in
the US, I spend my time at venues or events that are full of foreigners.
Whenever I’m in the US and I meet a woman from say,Argentina, and I immediately start telling
her about the three months I lived in Buenos Aires... in Spanish... it’s pretty easy to get a date
with her, as you can imagine.
To some people this sounds like “copping out” or like it’s not really learning pick up or game.
But here’s the thing, that’s the kind of woman who’s going to make me happy. She’s going to
have shared experiences and values with me. And our metric for success is maximizing
happiness, not racking up the most lays, or the having the most impressive “skills.”
It’s easy to get caught up in the unimportant details, the men’s locker room type of boasting,
and easy to forget why we’re really here: we want to be with women who make us happy.
The answer for you is going to be completely different. You’ll have to experiment. These are
just some successful examples.
Demographics affect every interaction you have with women. If there is too large of a
demographic mismatch, then the friction will be incredibly high, and no matter how attractive
you are, she will not be able to connect with you.
This may explain a fair amount of failure you’ve had up until this point.
Expand your interests and pursue them.
If you’re interested in spirituality and meditation, pursue it. If you’re interested in politics and
being active in your community, pursue it. If you’re interested in food from around the world,
pursue it. Take up cooking classes, food tastings,restaurant openings, etc.
Beliefs and Self-Selection
Lifestyle choices may play an obvious role in the demographic of women we would like to meet.
If you like to do yoga, then if you go do yoga, you’ll meet other women who like to do yoga.
They’ll likely be attracted to you and you likely attracted to them. Duh.
What’s not quite as obvious, but just as important if not more important, is how our beliefs
naturally screen the women who come into our lives. When I say beliefs, I mean beliefs about
women, sex,relationships and ourselves.
The idea is that our beliefs are reflected in our behavior, and behavior determines which (and
how many) women are attracted to us.
For instance, if you believe all women are sluts and untrustworthy, then the only women who
are going to be willing to tolerate your judgmental attitude are promiscuous women who are
untrustworthy. Social psychology refers to this as the assortment effect and it's been
demonstrated in study after study.
Another example is the belief that women want and enjoy sex as much as men do. This belief
was a big one for me. Many men don’t believe that women actually enjoy or fantasize about
sex.
So how would this belief affect your behavior and screen the women who are attracted to
you?
If you believe women don’t or shouldn’t enjoy sex, then the women who do enjoy sex will most
likely not feel comfortable expressing their sexuality around you. And the women who do not
enjoy sex will feel like you understand them.
Thus, you’ll be stuck dating a bunch of women disconnected from their sexuality and
uncomfortable having sex with you.
But if you believe that women do enjoy sex, then the women who do enjoy sex will feel
comfortable expressing their sexuality around you, while the women who are not comfortable
expressing their sexuality will not be comfortable around you. Yes, this will invite rejections, but
remember, rejections are a form of screening for demographics and in this case, it’s doing you a
favor.
You’ll end up with a bunch of sexual and sensual women who enjoy being with you. Nothing
wrong with that!
Screening women through your personal beliefs is incredibly powerful. I honestly think that
most “problems” that men turn to tactics and techniques to overcome, could easily be solved
by simply adopting the appropriate beliefs. Unfortunately, beliefs are harder to pinpoint and
also harder to implement than simply memorizing some lines or basic rules or techniques.
I think acknowledging your beliefs and also being able to acknowledge that they may not be
true, comes back to what was discussed in Chapter 4: being able to take an open and honest
look at yourself and your desires. Becoming a confident man requires first and foremost an
honesty with oneself. Part of that honesty with yourself involves observing and challenging
your own beliefs. If you have lived your entire life believing women are untrustworthy or that
women who express their sexuality are immoral, then perhaps you should evaluate what kind
of women those beliefs are going to attract into your life.And if you don’t want to attract those
kinds of women, perhaps you should look at changing your beliefs.
As a concrete example of how our beliefs lead to our expectations which lead to our results,
let's take a cross-section of a couple typical beliefs that men have about women and see what
kind of results we could expect from them.
The first belief is the assumption that a woman is attracted to you. There are some men who
operate on the assumption that all women are interested in them until proven otherwise.
There are other men who operate on the assumption that no women are interested in them
until proven otherwise.
Obviously, there's no way for any man to always know which women are interested in him at
any given time. Men who over-assume attraction from women are obviously going to
periodically pursue women who are actually not interested. And men who under-assume
attraction will periodically let go of women who are interested.
The second belief we'll look at is that women play games or are "testing" you.A lot has been
made about women and the "tests" that they put men through. I personally believe that these
ideas of tests are blown out of proportion. And as we'll see, women will only toy with your
emotions if you expect them to do it or let them do it.
Men who are paranoid about games and tests end up trying to out-game these women.
Sometimes it works, but sometimes it drives away women who were legitimately honest about
their interest. Other times they lose the game and are lead on by women who were not
interested and end up wasting a bunch of time.
Now, let's say you go out and get a bunch of phone numbers over the period of months. During
this period you have some configuration of these two beliefs. What are your results going to
look like over the long-term?
Assume attraction;Assume women are playing games — If you assume women are attracted
to you, then you're rightly going to pursue every woman you have an opportunity with, whether
they actually like you or not. But if you believe that most of them are going to manipulate you
and play games with you, then you're going to try to play games with them as well — not
answering calls, postponing dates, teasing and "calling them out" for bad behavior.
Let's see what kind of results these beliefs will likely bring.
Let's begin with women who are attracted to you and are NOT playing games — they're being
upfront and honest about their interest. But because you believe they ARE playing games,
you're going to try to "out-game" a woman who's not actually playing games with you. This will
actually come off as try-hard and high-maintenance, effectively scaring off the honest and
upfront women from becoming involved with you.
Women who are not attracted to you and do not play games will simply flake on you.
Women who are not attracted to you and DO play games will enter into a "game battle" with
you in which you'll end up losing, since they are not actually interested.All they will do is waste
your time and confuse you.
And finally, women who DO like you and DO play games, will enter into a "game battle" with
you in which you may win or lose. But even if you win, you have now attracted a dramatic and
manipulative woman who will lie and use you. And to get there, you dealt with a bunch of
dramatic and manipulative women who never had any interest in you.
All of the honest and upfront women passed you by, being turned off by your inability to be
straightforward about your intentions.
Result: High effort, low reward way to end up with manipulative women.
Assume No Attraction; Assume they Don't Play Games - Suppose you assume most women
do not play games and most women are not attracted to you, let's see how this will play out on
your results.
Because you assume most women are not interested in you, you will spend a lot of time
gaming women who actually aren't, converting very few. Women who are not attracted and do
not play games will repeatedly reject you. Women who are not attracted but do play games will
milk your attention and validation, wasting your time and effort.
Conversely, you will turn off a few attracted women by over-investing in them. The ones who
do not play games will either just drop you for being try-hard or they will hook up with you
anyway, regardless of what you say. Women who do play games will feign disinterest, but
because you assume they're not attracted, and don't play games, you'll believe them and stop
pursuing.
What you'll be left with is a handful of women who were attracted to you anyway, who don't
play games, but would have hooked up with you regardless of what you said, but you just
made it much harder on them and yourself. So all of your effort to win them over was pointless
and actually scared some of them away.
Result: Highly inefficient way of ending up with women who would have liked you anyway.
Assume No Attraction; Assume They Play Games — Having both of these sets of beliefs will
perhaps lead to the saddest results of all.
Since you will assume almost no women are attracted to you, you will overcompensate, scaring
away a great many who actually are attracted to you, and rightly recognizing the ones who are
not interested. But since you assume that women play games, you will not trust these
women's reactions and waste a lot of time trying to win over women who never liked you in the
first place, and scaring off women who originally liked you even more than before.
The only women who will put up with you are women who play games. But because you
assume they don't like you, you'll be unlikely to ever pursue the women who are interested but
playing games, and you will fetter away your time and effort with the uninterested women who
play games as well.
All in all, you will expend a massive amount of time and effort trying to win over women who
were never interested and scaring away women who were. But because you believe the
honest women who genuinely liked you to be a) dishonest and b) not actually attracted, you
will never act on the correct signals, always reverting back to your games and tricks to try to
win them over.
Now you see how some men can experience nothing but rejection for years on end. This is an
example of how. Men who hold both of these beliefs strongly — that they aren’t attractive and
that women toy with them — rarely get far in any of their relationships.
Result:A lot of stress for nothing.
Assume Attraction; Assume They Don't Play Games — Now let's look at the complete
opposite set of beliefs. You believe most women are inherently attracted to you and you also
believe that women are honest and upfront about their intentions.
First of all, women who are interested in you and honest about it, you will immediately hook up
with them.And it will be great, passionate sex.
Women who are not interested in you and upfront about it, you will immediately move on,
wasting no time or energy.
Women who are interested in you but play games, you will take them at their word and stop
pursuing them. Sometimes this will actually induce a woman who plays games to stop playing
games when she realizes she may lose you. Other times it doesn't.
Women who don't like you but play games, you will take them at their word and when they
don't follow through, you will move on.
What you will end up with are women who are attracted to you and who are not afraid to show
it. All of the women who were afraid to show it, you unconsciously screened and weeded out
by simply accepting their actions and behavior at face value. The women who were not
attracted or interested in you, you unconsciously screened through by not trying to win them
over.
All in all, little time, little effort, and lots of honest, genuine women who are attracted to you,
appreciate you and want to have sex with you.Sounds good to me.
Result:Amazing sex with women who are attracted to you with no headaches and no games.
Age, Money and Looks
The touchiest part of demographics — and possibly the touchiest subject of all dating advice
— is that of age, money and looks.
I want to get this out of the way and make it 100% clear. Age, money and looks matter... in
some cases a lot, in other cases, not a lot, but they still matter.And anyone who tells you that
they don’t matter is lying.
With that said, age, money and looks don’t matter nearly as much as most men think. And if
you’re aware of the effects of demographics, you can work around them and even work them
to your advantage.
When it comes to age, studies show that men’s physical attractiveness peaks at around 31 (a
luxury considering women peak around 21) and that our physical attractiveness recedes far
slower than women’s does. In fact, studies have found that the average 45-year-old male is
still considered as physically attractive as the average 18-year-old male.
The main reason is that studies have also found that women judge status far less based on
actual physical dimensions and far more on style, grooming and how men present themselves.
As men, we’re extremely lucky in this regard. Taking a man from a baggy beer T-shirt and illfitted
jeans to a nice suit with a professional haircut will immediately bump him up 50% in the
looks department overnight, whereas with women it’s a constant and never-ending battle to
maximize their physical appearance as much as possible.
How to be as good-looking as possible will be covered in depth in the following chapter, but for
now, just know that no matter how ugly you think you are (and chances are, you aren’t), there’s
hope for you.And we’ll take care of it soon enough.
Money is nice in that it demonstrates success and implies other positive attractive traits. But
again, its utility is vastly overblown. When it comes to money, once again the surveys and
studies have some interesting findings.
The first is that money/success matters more depending on your age. The older you are, the
more money you’re expected to have and the more successful you’re expected to be in order
to be attractive. The other finding is that the less wealthy SHE is, the more important money
will be to her.
This is why the stereotypical gold-digger is usually a very beautiful young woman who grew up
in poverty. Women who grow up with money or have money usually don’t care about it as
much.
But the fact remains that women perceive men with money the same way we perceive women
with good looks: as social status. How each woman defines social status and whether money
is a part of that or not is going to vary.
For instance, in the high-end “trendy” night club demographic, ask yourself what kind of girl
frequents a ridiculously overpriced night club so she can hang out with C-list celebrities every
week and have random guys ogle her and buy her drinks?
A girl seeking a lot of social status... and for these girls, money matters. Success matters. But
most of all...
Attractive behavior matters.
Which brings me to my primary point when it comes to age, money and looks.Again, it’s about
the demographics.
Ask yourself which demographic of women looks or money are highly important for? Women
who tend to value only good looks tend to be women who have only good looks. Women who
are highly interested in money are going to be women who don’t have other interests or other
things going for them.
I saw a quote recently that said, “Only lazy women are interested in men with money, because
they don’t have anything else going for them.”
What I’m saying is, women who only care about things such as looks and money are usually
going to be women who you’re not going to be interested in or who aren’t going to make you
happy.So you’re not missing out on much.
With that said, everybody values looks and success to a certain extent. So it’s not something
we can write off completely. You should be as good-looking as you can possibly be. And you
should be as financially successful as you can possibly be.And even the most interesting and
well-rounded and psychologically healthy women are still going to prefer a good-looking and
successful man to one who isn’t.All things equal, looks and money always increase your odds.
But I would just add the caveat that you should be as good-looking as possible for you. You
should be as financially successful as possible for you. These are just other avenues in which
to invest in yourself.
So yes, looks and money matter, so the question is, how do they affect our results with the
majority of women?
It’s simple: money, looks and success are all indicators of status. Women are attracted to
status.Behavior is also an indicator of status.
The more money/looks/success you have, the less attractive behavior you need. The
less money/looks/success you have, the more attractive behavior you need.
Again, this kind of comes back to the concept of “game.” The idea of game is the idea that you
can pick up any girl simply by your behavior, not by using social connections, wealth or good
looks.
So if you’re short, or older, or not that good-looking, you can still theoretically attract any
woman you want, it’s just going to take more attractive behavior.
Another way to think of this is that age, money and looks are universal demographics, and
therefore lacking in any one of them is apt to cause extra friction everywhere.
But just because there’s friction, or just because there are less Receptive women is no excuse
for not having success in the long run.
The vast majority of men who get hung up on looks and money get hung up on them because
they’re using it as an excuse. It’s absolutely not a valid excuse. A guy who is good-looking or
rich still has to work for his results, he just doesn’t have to work as hard as the next guy.
Trust me, I’ve coached hundreds of men who were far more professionally successful than me
and far better-looking than me, yet I still get with more women and hotter women than them.
Being goodlooking and being rich is worth nothing if you don’t do something with it. You can be
the richest guy in the world, but if you behave like a timid, negative and weak chump, then
women will still be repelled.
And as we’ll discuss in the next chapter, anyone can be handsome and appear high-status if
they put enough effort into it.So no excuses.
And of course, status is ultimately determined by demographics. At a college house party, a
burly 20-year-old kid who crushes beer cans on his head is going to have a high level of status
to the girls there.At an opening at a local art gallery, he is going to have almost none.A skinny
bass-playing hipster is going to have high status at a local indie show and low status at a
business-networking event.A successful stock trader who wears Armani suits is going to have
high status at his firm’s annual Christmas party and little status at a hippy music festival.
It’s all relative. The key is to 1) recognize your personal interests and strengths, and 2) build
upon those personal interests and strengths to quickly attract women in your preferred
demographic.
Race and the Foreigner Effect
It’s worth taking a moment to mention race and its effect on attraction and dating. A lot of
foreign men or men of different ethnicities have a lot of insecurities or false beliefs about their
race and their ability to date women of other races. Many Indian and Asian men feel like White
women would never be attracted to them. A lot of Black men run into threatened responses
from White and Asian women.
There are two main considerations about race. The first is that race naturally polarizes your
responses. In a way, this is good. But it’s also going to be a little bit of a rougher experience for
some minorities.
I want to re-iterate: it creates a more intense dating environment for minorities, but not
necessarily an advantaged/disadvantaged environment.
So for instance, if you’re a White guy, then most women will be pretty Neutral towards your
race. This allows you a greater amount of overall opportunities, but they’re all opportunities
you’ll still have to work for. You’re going to be hard pressed to find a woman who says to
herself,“Oh my god, I’m meeting a White guy! This is great!”
(The exception is, of course, if you live in a country where White people are a minority, such as
Japan or South Korea.)
But if you are Asian, African, Middle Eastern or Latino, then approaching women is going to
sometimes elicit a small polarization. Some women are going to immediately be more intrigued
and interested in meeting you, and other women are going to be more shut off from meeting
you.
In my experience in the western world,Asian and Indian men run into the smallest amounts of
polarization. Latin and middle eastern men run into a modest amount, and black men will run
into a significant amount of polarization depending on the region and the woman. There are
some women (of all races) out there who absolutely love Black men.A lot of women fantasize
about Black men and wonder what it’d be like to be with one.And there are others who are not
interested in them at all.
But if you are a Black man, you need to be prepared for this dichotomy of responses. You will
get some very harsh rejections — rejections that your White or Asian friends will not
experience often.At the same time, you will meet women who will far more excited to have sex
with you because of your race. And as you probably know, there’s a saying among women:
“Once you go black, you never go back.”
Also, typically, if you’re a minority then women of your own ethnicity will be polarized towards
you. So, for instance, if you’re an Asian man, then Asian women are going to most likely
respond the most warmly to you and more warmly than they would to a White guy or a Latin
guy. If you’re Latino, then Latin women will respond the most warmly towards you and so on.
The reason for this is not only because of cultural similarities (chances are you and she both
grew up in Latin households), but also because humans are hardwired to be attracted to
members of the opposite sex who have similar physical traits as themselves. This isn’t always
the case, but people generally feel the most comfortable around people who are similar to
them.
The second effect of being a minority or hitting on women of a different race is that you will
have to face racial stereotypes. This is an unfortunate but true part of our world. People make
racial stereotypes about each other whether they realize it consciously or not. I didn’t truly
understand this until I began to travel widely and met women in countries where White men
had certain stereotypes that I had to deal with repeatedly.
I’d like to make it very clear so that I don’t offend anybody in this section: the racial stereotypes
I mention below are not my personal beliefs and are not necessarily true. They’re simply what
I’ve observed working and speaking with hundreds of minority men in the Western world. So
don’t take this as gospel, but merely my observations from their experiences.
Unfortunately, as much as we’d like to pretend we don’t live in a somewhat racist world, we do.
And so while you will meet many, many women who don’t care what race you are, you will meet
some who will care, and you will meet a few who may have ignorant beliefs about your
ethnicity.
In general, in Western culture the stereotype of Asian or Indian men is that they are hardworking
and smart, but traditional, nerdy, and emotionally shut down. The stereotype of Latin
men is that they’re romantic and emotional, but also selfish and unfaithful. The stereotype of
Middle Eastern men is that they are controlling and somewhat misogynistic. The stereotype of
black men is that they are very aggressive and sometimes disrespectful.
I didn’t invent these stereotypes. I don’t even necessarily believe them. But they are simply
what I’ve observed over my years and years of going out with men, and speaking to them
about their experiences.
But what most men of minority don't realize is that racial stereotypes can be used to your
advantage. What I’ve found, and what many minority men have found, is that if you can
calibrate your behavior to contrast your racial stereotype, you’ll actually create a lot of intrigue
and attraction on the spot.
For instance, if you’re an Asian man, making an effort to be even more playful and energetic
and sexually aggressive will actually net you even more positive reactions than a White guy
behaving the same way.
If you’re a black man, behaving in a sensitive and understanding way will often net you more
positive responses than if a White man does it.
The reason this works is because you’re going against your racial stereotype. Consciously or
not, many women will see an Asian guy and automatically make assumptions about him... but if
he turns out to be the most engaging and exciting man that they’ve met in weeks, it creates a
high level of intrigue, a much higher level of intrigue than if another average White guy behaved
the same way. Your simple presence and behavior challenges their conceptions of what Asian
men are like and therefore make you incredibly unique to her right off the bat.
Of course, you will meet many, many, many women in the Western world who don’t care what
race you are and none of this is an issue. In fact, I would say most women don’t care what race
you are, at least not enough to affect your results.
The other point of interest is the foreigner effect. Being a foreigner in another country is going
to polarize you with most women. In the long run, this is a good thing (and one reason I enjoy
living abroad so much), but it does mean you’re going to have to face a lot more rejection and
confusion than you would back in your home country.
The degree that you polarize will depend on the country and where you’re from, as well as the
stereotypes your nationality carries with it (if any).All in all, the foreigner effect can be a more
uncomfortable experience. But I’ve found that once you get over your fear of rejection, it’s
actually a much more enjoyable experience. When I’m living in another country, I know that the
few women who don’t reject me outright are going to be very compatible with me and we’ll
probably have a great fling or relationship.
Social Proof
One of the more popular concepts that Pick Up Artist theory introduced into the dating world
was the concept of social proof and how it affects social status. If you remember from Chapter
1, women tend to seek out the highest status male possible. Even though this concept of
status is murky and not always clear, women have unconscious ways of detecting a high
status male.
The concept of social proof comes from influence psychology and is well-documented in
everything from salesmanship, to advertising, to politics, and to attraction and relationships.
The idea is that as humans, when we see many other people valuing something, we will
unconsciously value it ourselves. For instance, if everybody else is talking about a new movie,
we are more likely to want to see it because we’ll unconsciously assume that it’s a good or
important movie to see.
This works with people as well. If you’re at a party and someone walks in and everybody in the
party stops what they’re doing to turn and say hello to that person, your first thought would
probably be,“Wow, who is that guy?” Chances are you’d want to meet him as well.
The idea is that this applies to women and attraction as well. If you are that man who walks
into a room and everybody stops what they are doing to talk to you, then the women in the
room are more likely to perceive you as high-status and be attracted to you. Or if you’re a man
who multiple women are flirting with, then it’s going to incite even more women to begin flirting
with you.
This is one reason why men in power -- celebrities, athletes, etc. -- are desired by so many
women.
Despite a lot of shoddy application and theorizing by the Pick Up Artists, this concept and its
effect on attraction hold true. The goal, as a man, is to cultivate as much social status within
your demographic as possible.
So, for instance, if you are a high-powered executive at your firm, then you have a large degree
of social status and social proof at work. Chances are, the women who work with you are going
to have some degree of attraction for you. But if you go to a nightclub on the weekend and
know nobody there, then your social status is back to nothing.You’re just another guy there.
Where I’ve seen a lot of pick up theory go wrong is the idea that if you talk to and meet a lot of
people in a neutral environment, that this will generate social proof and attraction. My
experience says this isn’t true and is most likely a placebo. Humans are selfish creatures and
we’re usually only interested in what people around us are interested in. If I’m in a bar and 10
people I don’t know all know one guy, I still don’t really care who it is.
Social proof only functions within a demographic itself. That’s why once you’ve narrowed down
your demographic, you want to cultivate your connections and put yourself into as big of a
leadership position as possible. Don’t just join the intramural ultimate Frisbee team, start
organizing it. Don’t just volunteer at a charity event, help find sponsors for it. Don’t just go hang
out at a local nightclub, but become a promoter for it.
Part of living the honest lifestyle is to pursue what you’re passionate about to the fullest
extent. If you absolutely love visiting art exhibitions, don’t just visit a bunch of art exhibitions,
but take an active role in the organization, start a meet up group to find other people who
want to visit them, create a forum for commentary. Don’t just pursue your interests, become a
leader in your interests. Don’t just choose a demographic of women to meet, dominate that
demographic.
Hopefully by now you’re getting a clearer idea of what demographic of women you’re currently
attracting and which demographic of women you’d like to attract. In the next chapter, we will
get into specifics on how to pursue the correct demographic for you and become as attractive
as you possibly can be. But first, I want to address a very popular concern of single men, and a
question I have gotten constantly over the last five years: the demographic of extremely
beautiful women.
The Most Beautiful Women
In this section, I will address the differences in one specific demographic: the most beautiful
women. Let’s arbitrarily say that this section applies to the top 1% of women in terms of
physical appearance and from here on refer to these women in general as the “Top 1%.”
Being the Top 1% in physical appearance means that more or less 99% of the male population
is going to be sexually interested and/or pursuing them in some way. This is a major difference
from just about any other woman out there. Even very attractive women may only have 70-
80% of the men they meet pursuing or interested in them. But as a Top 1% woman, for all
intents and purposes, every man she ever meets for her early adult life is going to be sexually
interested in her.
Obviously, this is going to have a significant effect not only on their psychology, but also the
types of men that they’re attracted to.
There are two primary differences when dealing with the Top 1% demographic. The first is
that the most beautiful women rarely ever settle for a man who is not a total package — a
man who does not have all of the Three Fundamentals handled. The second difference is that
extremely beautiful women are usually far less needy when you meet them than the average
woman and therefore they’re going to be extremely attuned and sensitive to any neediness in
men.
This doesn’t help matters since the fact that these women are so beautiful often causes men
to become even more anxious, awkward and needy than usual around them. And as we
learned in Part I, her being less invested than normal while being surrounded by men who are
more invested than normal is a recipe for her being attracted to very, very few men.
But let’s start with the first difference: the fact that the Top 1% rarely ever settle for a man
with a major flaw.And by flaw, I don’t mean character flaw — we all have those — but I mean a
man who exhibits a large lack of confidence anywhere in his life.
If there is one thing that’s true about the Top 1%, it’s that they have a much larger selection of
suitors at any time than the average girl. They meet rich guys. They meet musicians and
actors and DJ’s and guys with big muscles and nice cars. It’s not that you need any of this stuff
(although it helps) but you cannot have a glaring hole in your lifestyle. You need to have your
lifestyle together.
A nice job you like, a nice place you like, nice friends you like, cool hobbies you like, good health
and good shape, and generally a welladjusted and confident person. Picking up most women,
you can get away without one or a few of that list. The Top 1%, you need to have them all
handled.You need to be a complete package.
Look at it from her perspective. The first way she screens men is by confidence and charm.
Let’s say she meets 20 men one week and three of them are confident and charming and she
likes being around them. The first one is VERY good-looking but also unemployed and living
with a family friend. He has no car. The second has his life together and is pretty wealthy but is
overweight and dresses poorly. The third guy has his life together and is in great shape and
takes care of himself.
All else being equal, she’s going to go with the third. It’s not that looks are all that matter, but
when she has so many options, she has no reason to ever settle. That’s why you need to be
the complete package. You don’t have to look like Brad Pitt, or be a millionaire, or be a
worldclass athlete or something. You really can’t have a major hole in your lifestyle. Treat this
as kind of a prerequisite.
The second major difference is more difficult to handle — the fact that more beautiful women
are more confident up front than average makes them more difficult than the average woman.
But paradoxically, if you try harder to get with a more beautiful woman, then you will
demonstrate yourself as even more invested than before. It’s back to the old “try to look like
you’re not trying” conundrum.
The answer is to stop caring about how beautiful they are.
This sounds totally counter-intuitive at first, but it’s true. Top 1% women are treated
differently their entire lives by men. These men project their fears and fantasies onto these
women, and when they approach them, they’re doing it for their own self-esteem and
validation, not because they actually care what the girl is like or interested in. Do not be this
guy. The fact that you even ask this question means you are guilty of this. I was guilty of this
too.
The first step to doing this is to ditch any sort of rating scale for women.Again, I was guilty of
this for a long time, but the rating scale is toxic in so many ways, the worst of which is that it
subtly stereotypes behavior based upon appearance. So the fact that you even recognize in
your mind that approaching a “10″ isdifferent than a “7″ is immediately going to affect your
behavior towards her. A rating scale is a subtle and unconscious way of putting women on a
pedestal and therefore highly investing yourself for superficial reasons and making yourself
more needy. This leads to unattractive intentions which will permeate all of your behavior. Top
1% women will sense this immediately, because unlike most people, Top 1% women have
been dealing with needy men their entire lives. They can smell it a mile away.
The other problem with treating women differently based on ratings is simply that it doesn’t
work. You’ll meet 10’s who think they’re 5’s and 5’s who think they’re 10’s. Not to mention that
your 6 could be my 8 and my 5 could be your 9. At the end of the day, her behavior is more
determined by how she sees herself than how others see her.So it’s pointless.
When you see her, she’s just another person. You really have to stop caring. I used to get so
obsessed about finding “high quality” girls, and I just let it go. It’s no coincidence that I attract
the hottest girls of my life now with less effort than ever.
A lot of men have a hard time swallowing this. They want the hottest women because after all,
they're the hottest... so if they stop wanting them, won’t they stop getting them?
Not necessarily. It’s OK to recognize a woman’s beauty and to be turned on by that beauty.
But it’s not OK to invest one’s identity in attaining or conquering that beauty. It's not OK to
seek validation based on that beauty. Dating her to impress your friends, brag to other guys, or
use her as an achievement or accomplishment.
A beautiful woman will not necessarily make you happier than a less beautiful woman.Any sort
of drive or need to have sex with the most beautiful women for the sake of sex with beautiful
women and not for the sake of seeking joy, love and connection is a purely selfish endeavor.
There is nothing “high value” about a really hot girl, it’s just that men project their insecurities
onto these women and think there’s something valuable about them. If you ask these women
themselves, they have no perception of this “value” or “status” you speak of. None at all.
These are just merit badges in your head, constructed as a sad way to validate yourself.
I’ve been with several models and professional dancers. I’ve been on dates with women who
have been approached 3-5 times while on the date with me. I’ve dated a woman who dated an
NBA basketball player before me. I’ve dated women where guys I didn’t know came up and
gave me thumbs up while she was looking away.
I never, ever, ever, ever heard one of these girls speak of men in terms of not being cool
enough or not being rich enough or good-looking enough to hang out with them. In fact, I never
heard any of them say anything derogatory about men hitting on them except for the man’s
lack of confidence, lack of respect or lack of authenticity around her.
A typical complaint from a normal girl: “He’s really nice, why doesn’t he ask me out on a date
more often?”
A typical complaint from a very hot girl: “Ugh, that club owner keeps flashing his watch at me.
He’s so sleazy.”
People really don’t get it: these women don’t have it that great. Imagine wanting to date a
really great guy, someone who actually cares about you, and literally every single guy you meet
starts acting like a total idiot trying to impress you or manipulate you into bed. Meanwhile, your
friends who aren’t as pretty as you seem to keep meeting really nice normal guys who actually
care about them. It’s actually very frustrating. Imagine having everyone evaluate you for how
pretty you are and not your personality or what you say. You’d actually be pretty insecure
about what people thought of you.
This is also why the best way to net a Top 1% girl is to connect with her genuinely and
emotionally as soon as possible. Find something that you like about her other than her looks
and relate that to her honestly.
Or as the old saying goes: “Tell the beautiful girls they’re smart and tell the smart girls that
they’re beautiful.”
Men always assume, the hotter the woman, the harder she is to get. I suppose on a purely
supply/demand level, that’s true. There are fewer hot girls and more guys trying to get them.
But they’re really no different. The only thing that’s different is that unlike an average pretty girl
who only has 50% of guys she meets put her on a pedestal, the super hot girl has 99% of men
she meets put her on a pedestal, so she’s going to see through your bullshit immediately.
And in case you didn’t catch it: The rating scale is a pedestal. The concept of “high value” is a
pedestal. Coming up with special pick up lines is a pedestal. Performing is a pedestal. Believing
you have to treat her differently in any way because of how she looks is a pedestal.
I recommend guys switch to a binary system of 1 or 0.A “1” is a woman you’d like to be with.A
“0” is a woman you wouldn’t. Why you want to be with her or not, how she looks, whether she’s
just OK looking or the most beautiful woman on the planet — none of that matters. Either
you’re interested or you're not. The rest doesn’t matter.
And in the meantime, get your life together. Stop caring about looks so much. Treat her like
you’d treat anybody else. Stop pursuing her to prove something to yourself. Stop treating her
like a trophy or an achievement or a merit badge… and just talk to her. Just the fact that you
talk to her like a normal human being with confidence and civility will immediately differentiate
you from 99% of the other men she meets.
Being Something Versus Saying Something
If there’s one take-away from this chapter, it’s that it is far more powerful to be something
attractive rather than to say something attractive. You can say the most attractive sentence
in the world, but if it isn’t backed up by who you are, then it’s not going to have any meaning.
Whereas if you are something amazing, then anything you say will be attractive, because it will
be coming from a genuinely attractive man.
Women are attracted to your identity. Words mean nothing. What you say is only a means to
buy you enough time to show her that identity. Notice I said “show her” not “tell her.”
For instance, imagine you meet two different men. One of them is a scrubby, ugly, and shady
character. He can’t look you in the eye. He smells bad. He mumbles to himself and scratches
himself in inappropriate places. While you’re talking to him, he looks at you and says, “You
know, I get a good feeling from you, you’re someone worth knowing.”
How would that make you feel?
You’d probably get the creeps and want to get away from him as quickly as you could.
Now imagine you’re talking to a handsome, successful man who is charismatic and charming.
Everything he says is fascinating and interesting. Then he looks you in the eye and says, “You
know, I get a good feeling from you, you’re someone worth knowing.” How would that make you
feel?
It’d make your day. Why? Because the second man is someone. He’s not just saying
interesting and charming things, but he is interesting and charming. Suddenly the words that
come out of his mouth have a whole new weight and meaning.
Again, a lot of men take this as another invitation to perform. Last night, I was in a restaurant
with my girlfriend. It was a nice and expensive restaurant.A couple sat down at the table next
to us. They were clearly on a date. The man was a bit older and the woman was young and
beautiful. The man immediately closed the menu and said, “Don’t order anything, I know
something special that’s not on the menu and you’re going to eat it.” The woman kind of
meekly said, “OK.” The man then argued with the waiter about cooking some mystery dish
that wasn’t on the menu.
In the man’s mind, he probably saw himself as a successful, powerful man. What I saw was a
pathetic performance, overcompensation, a False Confidence.A successful man doesn’t need
to prove he’s successful, he just is.
This is why learning pick up techniques and tactics without the fundamental base of a strong
lifestyle and identity is more or less useless. That’s why trying to impress women are flaunt an
image to them will always backfire. Men can go out and perform as much as they want — for
weeks, months or even years — and they’ll never get good results because they’re not
portraying themselves well. They don’t have a clear and successful identity. They aren’t in
touch with the way in which they’re living their lives.
Because here’s the real take-away from this chapter: your life and everything that it
encompasses, is a reflection of your emotional investment in yourself. And the more invested
you are in yourself, the less needy you are with others.
Men who are more heavily invested in others than in themselves will float through life doing
what others direct them to do. They will wear whatever seems “OK.” They’ll groom themselves
to the bare-minimum level. They’ll get the normal job or go to a normal school just because
that’s what normal people do. They never bothered to strive to do something unique or original
or transcendent because that would mean risking not being accepted by others.
And as a result, these men present themselves poorly. They’re highlyinvested, unconfident
individuals and this is immediately apparent in their appearance and lifestyle. They dress
normally (or poorly), look normal, say normal things, go to a normal job, and live in a normal
place.
What does this say about how they feel about themselves? That they feel that they’re normal
— that they fight every day of their life to maintain the status quo. What does that subcommunicate
about their value to women? That they don’t have any.
Being sexual and being attractive, by its very nature, is controversial. You must be willing to do
something that is going to make you stand out. You are going to have to be willing to risk
people not liking you. You have to be willing to sacrifice some people’s approval in order to live
life on your own terms.
You have to be willing to polarize people’s opinion about you.
The less polarizing you are, the less attractive you are.And if you live a non-polarizing life, then
you not going to be attractive or unattractive.
You’re just going to be boring. More of the same. Dime a dozen.
Hopefully this chapter has helped you question what you’re doing with your life, what your
identity is, what you want out of your relationships and what kind of women you’d like to
attract.
The next chapter is going to get into specifics on how to portray yourself in a more polarizing
manner. It’s not portraying yourself in an outlandish manner (although that can work too), it’s
portraying yourself in a way that stands out.
Chapter 9: How to Be Attractive
As men, we’re prone to assume that women perceive attraction in the same way we do.
Science and psychology show that this isn’t the case.
Men judge female beauty mostly on physical traits: high cheekbones, facial symmetry, waist/hip
ratio, breast size, etc. As such, we often fall into the mistake that women judge our
attractiveness with the same metrics: hence obsessions with bench presses, height and penis
pills.
Yes, physical measurements play a role in how a man’s appearance is judged, but research
shows that other factors are more important.
That’s why I draw the distinction between being good-looking, and being attractive. Not
everybody is born good-looking. But any man, with some time and effort, can become
attractive.And in the end, what women want is a man who is attractive.
For some reason, many men believe that their physical appearance is set in stone and they
rarely have any interest in altering it or making any major changes. Indeed, for a lot of men, they
read about this stuff, buy a new shirt that’s a slightly brighter color, get a new watch and
consider these “dramatic” changes to their appearance.
Well, here are a couple unfortunate truths. The first is that appearance is extremely important.
The difference between being perceived as stylish and unstylish is night and day. Yes, you can
still be dressed like a bum and get girls, but the difference in the effort/reward ratio is massive.
A makeover and wardrobe change can make meeting and dating women three times easier
literally overnight. Not to mention all of the psychological side benefits of making you feel more
confident, more interesting, more excited, etc.
Remember, your outward appearance is a reflection of your selfinvestment (or lack thereof).
And your level of self-investment will make you more confident towards others — therefore
making your behavior more attractive. If you don’t put a lot of time and effort into how you look
and how you present yourself to the world, women look at that and make unconscious
assumptions about your status as a man.
The first and obvious step involves grooming and general maintenance. That means regular
showering, shaving and haircuts, wearing deodorant, brushing and flossing your teeth, keeping
clean fingernails and wearing clean clothes.
I should not have to be telling you this stuff, but just in case I do, there it is. The above
paragraph is non-negotiable, starting today.
There, now let’s move on to the biggest factors on your status and appearance, the two F’s:
Fashion and Fitness.
If these two F’s don’t excite you or if your immediate thought is,“Oh, I’ll skip this and go straight
to the pick up lines,” then I hate to break it to you, but things aren’t going to get any easier.
People are always talking about what the “magic pill” to attraction is. If there was such a thing
it would be the two F’s.Bar none, fitness and fashion will do more to attract women in a shorter
amount of time than anything else you can do. Being in decent shape and dressing well will
make every phase of the process easier and smoother: from meeting women, to attracting
them, to getting physical with them, to dating them and staying in a relationship with them.
There literally is no downside to either one.
So listen up and make a serious commitment to yourself, because if you don’t make a
commitment to yourself then nobody else will.
Fashion and Fitness
Many straight guys are averse to exploring their style and how they dress because they think
it’s “gay” or intrudes on their masculinity. It makes most men feel uncomfortable.A lot of men
feel set in their ways and don’t like the idea of changing the type of shirts they’ve worn, or the
haircut they’ve sported for years and years. They're also intimidated at the idea of standing
out or looking too different from the people they hang around.
If this describes you, then it is going to be a mental hurdle that you’ll have to overcome.
Recognize that unless you’ve spent a large amount of time focusing on fashion and style
already, chances are what you think looks good right now is not accurate at all. You may think
you dress well — hell, everyone assumes they dress well before they know better — but really
it’s likely that you don’t.
So the first step is recognizing what you don’t know.
There are a few rules to dressing well:
1. Wear clothes that fit.
2. Match.
3. Dress to your personality
We’ll go through and break each one down, one by one:
Clothes that fit: To start, the vast majority men don’t wear clothes that fit them properly. Men
often prefer comfort and practicality to any aesthetic purpose of wearing clothing, so most of
their clothing is too big. Chances are most of your clothing right now is too big. Many men are
also self-conscious about their body, so they buy large clothing to mask it.
When it comes to clothing, fit is king. You can have the nicest, most expensive clothes in the
world, but if they don’t fit well you’ll look like a clown. On the other hand, you can have some
modest or even mediocre clothing, but if it fits well (and you’re in decent shape), you’ll look
quite good.
Fit makes a massive difference and the change is immediately apparent:
The first step to overhauling your wardrobe should be to go through your closet and pull out
anything and everything that does not fit well.
You should always know your measurements. If you’re not quite sure, ask to get measured.
Most clothing department stores have a tailor who will gladly take your measurements for you.
With shirts, the shoulder seam should extend to the end of the shoulder, not any further. If it
extends past the end of your shoulder, then the shirt is too big.
On dress shirts, the cuffs should not extend past the wrist bone.
The bottom of your pants or jeans should rest gently on the top of your shoes (unless you
have a specific brand – rocker or hip hop jeans). There should not be more than one “break” in
your jeans — a break is a natural fold from them resting on the top of your shoe.
If you’re stepping on the back of your pants with the heel of your shoe, they’re too long. If your
jeans are raising up to expose your socks when you walk, they’re too short.
Your pants should never sag from your waist when you wear them, even when leaning or
bending over.Plumber’s cracks are never attractive.
Jeans should also never slip off your waist without a belt. Most men wear jeans that are too
large for them and feel awkward when they first put on a proper fitting pair of jeans. They feel
tight and uncomfortable at first.But this is normal.You’ll get used to them in time.
Here’s an example of jeans that don’t fit: And an example of
jeans and T-shirt that fit well:
A blazer that’s too big, notice the shoulder seams sagging
off the sides: And another outfit that fits very well:
Matching: Guys have an unbelievable knack for being
oblivious to colors and how to coordinate them.
Matching is actually simple once you know what to look for:
• Your belt should match your shoes and/or your accessories.
• If you’re wearing dress pants, your socks should match your pants. If you’re wearing jeans,
your socks should match your shoes.
• Your accessories must all be gold or all silver.
Here’s an easy way to get started. Go out and buy a “black set” and a “brown set”. Buy a nice
pair of black shoes, a nice black belt, and a black jacket. Then buy a nice pair of brown shoes, a
brown belt, and a brown jacket.
Then buy a few pairs of nice designer jeans with lighter and darker washes and a dozen or so
shirts.
Then it’s just mix-and-match.
You pick a pair of jeans, a nice shirt, and then throw your “brown set” or your “black set” on –
whichever set compliments the shirt and jeans the best. I like to wear the brown set with
lighter shirts and jeans, and the black set with darker shirts and jeans.
Of course, dressing gets more complicated than this, but this is an easy and fail-safe way to
start out.
Dress to your personality: Dressing to your personality is important to understand dressing
well.
Many men learn about fashion and then decide to buy some ridiculous stuff that does not suit
their lifestyle at all: a 40-year-old business executive with baggy jeans and a hoodie, a 20-yearold
college student with a $500 suit and sweater vest, or just all kinds of random stuff – LED
light belts, gold clock necklaces, top hats, etc. It’s amazing sometimes what people think is
being stylish when it’s really being outlandish.
You are not stylish if you are not dressing to your personality.
In fashion there are various stereotypes always considered attractive by women: the
skater/surfer look, the businessman look, the rock star look, etc.
For instance, if dressing like a rock star fits your personality, then do it. If you’re a top
accounting executive, you should dress like a stylish and successful businessman. If you love
hip-hop and DJ, then you should dress more along those lines.
Look through magazines and get on the internet. Find people who look like your personality.
Then model after those people’s appearance. The other way you can model people’s looks is
by going out and observing people.
Finally, if you’re struggling to get a jump start on fashion, get a fashionable female friend to
take you shopping.
Good female friends are a good asset if you’re clueless about shopping, size and what looks
good on you. They can educate you and give you an unbiased female opinion on what looks
hot on you and what doesn’t.
But be warned, just because they have a vagina doesn’t make them a de facto expert. Many
women aren’t as knowledgeable about fashion as they seem. Also, many women will try to
dress you to their idea of a hot guy, not necessarily what works best for you.
On my website, I recently collaborated with some professional French fashion consultants to
develop a style guide for men. It's loaded with much more depth and hundreds of photo
examples.You can learn more in the Further Reading section at the end of this book.
Fitness: I’m not going to get into the nitty-gritty of fitness in this book because there are so
many resources out there already.But I’ll make a few basic points.
1. Exercise, no matter what. This is not negotiable. Beyond simply making you look better
naked, exercise boosts your energy, raises testosterone, relieves symptoms of depression and
anxiety, and generally makes you feel better about yourself.
The exact way that you exercise isn’t as important as the fact that you do it. If you like to play
soccer, then find people to play soccer with. If you like to do calisthenics and yoga, then pursue
that. If you want to hit the weight room and get big, go for that.
2. Clean up your diet.An easy starting point that will give you 80% of the results for 20% of the
effort is simply cutting out the following things: sodas, fast food, desserts and candy. If you just
cut those things out of your diet, you’ll see a drastic improvement.
There’s a lot of info out there on low-carb, high-carb, highprotein, low-fat, and so on and so on.
Nutrition information is a sea that you can easily drown yourself in.
But if you start with the most fundamental basics and cut the above things out of your diet
(and start exercising regularly), it’s impossible to not see drastic results within a few months.
And again, similar to exercise, nutrition goes beyond making you look sexy. It makes you feel
better, gives you higher energy, makes your sex better, increases your moods, and can even
save you a lot of money.
Body Language
Body language is something that can also be fixed in a relatively short amount of time and can
immediately make you appear more attractive.
There’s a popular study that says that only 7% of communication comes from the actual
words we speak. The rest is body language and tonality. Think about that for a second. That’s
over 90% of all communication.
Considering all of the discussion we’ve had about neediness, intention and sub-communication
in the beginning of the book, this shouldn’t surprise you though.
When it comes to body language, I think major problems can be changed consciously, but the
myriad of minor adjustments come naturally once you build confidence, become less needy and
get into shape.
To analyze your posture in this section, you will need the help of a mirror (preferably full-body).
1. Start by facing the mirror and then turn 90 degrees to the right or left. You should have a
perfect “side view” of yourself. Now look at the “ridge” that extends from your neck to the end
of your shoulder. If you’re wearing a shirt, look at the seam that extends from your neck to your
sleeve. That seam or ridge on almost everyone will be slanted forward. Move your shoulders
back until that ridge or seam is straight – going straight from your neck to your shoulder.
That’s the optimal position for your shoulders. Remember that position and remind yourself to
hold your shoulders there as often as possible.
2. Next, looking into the mirror, with your shoulders back, raise your chin up until it’s at a 90
degree angle with your neck. Your eyes should be looking dead ahead now – straight into
themselves in the mirror, or aiming straight at the horizon if you were walking. Make the back of
your neck as straight as possible with your back. Notice when you pull your head up like this
with your shoulders back, your stomach naturally comes in, and your back naturally straightens
up. This is what we want!
3. Next, look at your feet. They should be shoulder-width apart. Take note of which way your
feet are pointing. They should be pointed straight ahead or slightly outward at the most. If
they’re pointed inward or very far outward, this will cause posture problems and make you walk
funny. Turn them straight ahead or at a slight outward angle and hold them there. If they
continue to point in or out (especially when you sit down), it means that your calf muscles are
too tight, and you need to stretch them or roll them with a foam roller.
4. Now, it’s time to walk. Hold the position you’re in – shoulders back, head up, back straight,
stomach in, feet straight – and then slowly step in front of you.As you walk, you want to swing
your shoulders. Not too far, because that’ll make you look ridiculous, but move your shoulders
as you walk. This will create swagger and make you look more relaxed as you walk. It will
probably feel weird looking straight up and ahead while you’re walking, but this is good. You
want to be able to look everybody in the eye as you walk by them.
5. Finally, swing your arms slightly. If you don’t swing them, you look robotic. If you have them in
your pockets, you’re either cold or a pussy. If you swing them too far, you look ridiculous. Just
give them a slight swing… to go along with your swagger. There.
Practice this a few times until you can remember how it feels. Take note of the feeling and
then force yourself to go back to this position as much as possible.
Go step-by-step if you must.As you walk down the street, remember: shoulders back, chin up,
eyes straight, feet straight, shoulders swagger, arms swing.Always look straight ahead. Don’t
ever look down at the ground unless you think you’re about to trip. Look people in the eye as
they walk by – particularly attractive girls. You’ll catch people making eye contact with you.
You’ll feel the urge to look away. Don’t.Always make other people break eye contact with you
before you break it with them.
Do it until it becomes habit.
Challenge yourself to go out for a week straight and do this every time you’re in public. Notice
any changes in how you feel. Notice any shifts in people’s reactions to you. Notice any shifts in
your confidence.
Vocal Tonality
Vocal tonality is definitely overlooked by men. It’s not just having a sexy voice that’s important;
it’s having an expressive and a loud voice.
We actually have two “voices”: a “head” voice and a “chest” voice. Basically, when you sing,
your head voice does the high notes and the chest voice does the low ones. Your head voice
breathes out largely through your nose, while your chest voice through your mouth. The head
voice comes from the throat and the chest voice from the diaphragm.
Try this exercise. Hum a note, then slowly raise it and then slowly lower it. It should sound like a
siren, up high, down low, up high, down low. As you do this, pay attention to where the air
pressure in your body is. As you shift from high to low, it goes from your head to your chest,
and then back up again.
As you could guess, we want to develop that chest voice. Again, the only way to do this is
through conscious practice – reminding yourself countless times to speak from your chest
voice until it becomes habit.
Here’s a cool exercise that you can do. Read the following sentence aloud:
“Why don’t you come to the party with me?”
Now, hold your nose and read it again. How different is your tonality? If it’s not very different,
you already speak largely from your chest and probably have good tonality. If you suddenly
sound very nasal when you hold your nose and say it, you need to work on speaking with a
deeper voice.
Keep practicing it until you can say it while holding your nose and it doesn’t sound any
different.
Another problem men have is they often talk too quickly. This comes from a subconscious
belief that if we don’t get everything out quickly, people won’t listen to everything we have to
say. This is a needy behavior.
There’s not a definitive metric for this. But pay attention to whether people seem to have
trouble hearing you often. Experiment with slowing down how you speak and notice any
differences in how it feels or reactions you get. If people are constantly asking you to repeat
yourself, and it’s not loud in the room, you may speak too quickly.
Also, chances are you are not loud enough. In fact, just about everyone does not speak loud
enough. Speak louder. Do it now, do it everywhere. Don’t scream. But speak loudly, from the
diaphragm, from your chest voice. Research shows it commands more respect and attention.
Like body language, these adjustments will take time and practice to implement.
Not only do better body language and vocal projection engage other people more effectively,
but good body language has been shown to affect your moods positively. Yes, even shifting
your body into a more confident position consciously will make you feel more confident and
vice-versa. Even if you do it on purpose and know what you’re doing, it will still work. So start
paying attention to your body, how you present yourself, how you sit, how you stand, and the
amount of eye contact you’re making. It makes a difference.And it adds up quickly.
How to Be a Fascinating Person
One thing that consistently holds guys back is that they come across as just another typical
guy. Dime a dozen. We’re pressured most of our lives to go with the flow, go along with what
our friends like and just agree with what those around us think.
As we’ve discussed, this is unattractive behavior because it demonstrates a lack of investment
in your own interests, passions and desires. Attractive men are polarizing and uninhibited.
Attractive men make their opinions known. They’ve had unique experiences and ideas.
They’ve tried things most people haven’t tried, done things most people haven’t done, and
share their ideas openly and freely.
This section is going to go over some basic life habits you can develop to help you invest in
your own identity, to become more vulnerable in your everyday life, to become more fascinating
as an individual, and to come across as more attractive:
1. Develop Artistic Taste.
2. Try New Things.
3. Have Strong Opinions.
Develop Artistic Taste: When it comes to deciding what one likes and doesn’t like, most men
have very lukewarm reactions one way or the other.
“Yeah, that movie’s awesome,” or “Yeah, I like that one,” or “No, I don’t like that show.” It rarely
goes beyond that. There’s no sharing of why one prefers one type of music over another, one
movie over another, one author over another. And there’s no connection to the emotions
driving that preference.
For instance, a random Joe may say,“Ireally liked Terminator. It was pretty cool.”
A more interesting person may say, “ Terminator was great. But what’s more interesting to me
is that it was the first movie I can remember in which you ended up rooting for the villain.”
There’s nothing wrong with being amiable and enjoying similar things to your friends. But one
thing that will always make you stand out, particularly to women, is if you’ve not only expanded
your horizons, but made your own decisions about your personal tastes, your experiences and
what you think about various types of art.
Let’s be real, out of 10 guys the typical single woman meets, 9 of them are into the following
things: sports, comedy movies, rock and/or hiphop music, and other generic guy activities.
Again, nothing wrong with this, but what’s going to make you stick out?
We want to shape you into a man with taste, a man with opinions, and a man who can explain
exactly why he likes or dislikes everything from 70′s Motown records, to German films, to 19th
century literature to impressionistic art. Don’t get me wrong, I’m not about to tell you to go take
a bunch of art classes or whatever. You don’t need to be a superintellectual snob. This is
about developing your own opinions and enriching your life.
When I say “artistic taste,” I mean “art” in the broad sense here: music, movies, television,
theatre, art, poetry and literature.
We want to be well-read so that we have a good knowledge foundation and are aware of the
multitude of perspectives in the world. Now, we want to have a mature artistic sensibility so
that we can develop interesting opinions on everything from slasher movies to romantic poetry
to Angelina Jolie’s ass.
Too many men let their opinions be dictated by pop culture and their group of guy friends.
“Oh dude, Will Farrell is soooo funny.” “The new Batman movie is awesome.”
Few men ever stop and actually think critically about what’s being produced in Hollywood, or in
record studios for that matter. But when you do, you suddenly stand out from the rest — and
to women, in particular.
So here are some concepts to keep in mind as you go through your life experiencing art and
media:
1.Assume everything has a form of value; it’s your job to find it. Nothing is stupider than to be
prejudice against a genre of music or type of movie for no other reason than because of some
stereotype or preconceived notion about it.
For instance, hipsters who trash anything “mainstream” as if music couldn’t be both good and
mainstream. People who criticize abstract art because “a child could make that,” or guys who
hate on romantic comedies because they’re “chick flicks.”
I find the whole ironic hipster-scene indie rock thing pretentious and obnoxious, but there’s a
lot of good indie rock and folk music out there that I never would have enjoyed if I didn’t give it a
fair chance. I generally don’t like chick flicks, but if they’re done well, not ridiculous and don’t
perpetuate horrible sexual stereotypes, I’ve been known to get in touch with my feminine side
and enjoy a few (Love Actually is a guilty pleasure of mine… shh… don’t tell anyone).
Drop all of this prejudice and adopt this mentality immediately: “there has to be something to
this form of art, otherwise it wouldn’t have a following, so I should find out what that something
is.” Once you find it, then decide if you like it or not. Whether you like something or not, you
should always be able to appreciate it.
2.Always expand your horizons; start with what’s generally considered the best.
Some forms of art will come easily and naturally to you. It takes me literally two seconds to
identify rock music that is transcendentally good, or painfully bad. I’ve been listening to it all my
life. Country? Classical? Bluegrass? That takes some more time.
About seven years go, I decided to get into hip hop. I finally figured I was being stupid to brush
it all off just because there wasn’t singing involved. So what did I do? I went out and started
with what was classically considered the “best” hip hop out there. Tupac, Notorious B.I.G., Dre’s
The Chronic among others. I listened to them until I started getting it. From there I slowly
expanded out to other artists, from old favorites to newer favorites like Outkast and Eminem
(current at the time) until I kind of got a handle on what differentiated rappers from each other.
You notice the different rhyming patterns, the uniqueness of the beats, cadence and lyrical
themes. Once you make these distinctions, you have the ability to judge the quality beyond
simply “I like it,” or “I think it sucks.”
Do the same with movies. Watch every movie in IMDB’s top 20 movies of all time list. Google
critics’ top 10 movies of all time lists and watch everything on there. Watch every movie that’s
won an Oscar for “Best Picture.” That’s a good start.
Watch these movies and try to pick out what makes them so great. If it doesn’t click, it may not
be because it’s a “bad movie,” but because you don’t get it. Have more developed opinions.
Some people complain that No Country for Old Men isn’t good because it’s slow and nothing
changes. That’s fine, but they kind of missed the point.
3. Try to understand educated perspectives.
As you’re listening to new music and watching new movies, frequent the following websites:
www.allmusic.com, www.metacritic.com, and www.rottentomatoes.com. Read critical reviews
and observations.
This isn’t to base your opinion off of what the critics say (that’s lame in its own way), but it’s to
gain perspective for things you may not have noticed before. If I’m particularly intrigued by a
movie, I usually try to read a good review and a bad review to try and understand their point of
view and why they felt the way they did about the piece of work.
When you do this, this gives you greater understanding and interpretation of the art form, so
that in future movies you see or albums you hear in that genre, you’ll begin to notice things you
never did before: “Oh, Al Pacino totally carried this movie,” “the guitar playing isn’t very
inventive in this group, but the songwriting is great,” “this TV show’s concept is good, but the
dialogue is lacking,” “her singing is pitch-shifted and the beats are all redundant.” Etc.
4. Judge art based on its intentions, as well as its result.
This is what I call “snob prevention.” This is for the people who may fall into the trap of trying to
argue that a movie like Wedding Crashers is a bad movie because there’s no greater
philosophical statement or merit in it.
Wedding Crashers isn’t trying to make a greater philosophical statement, it’s trying to make
you laugh and feel good.And it accomplishes that extremely well. So it should be considered a
good movie. Sure, comedies aren’t as hard to make as a deep, probing movie like Citizen Kane,
but that doesn’t make them bad.
The opposite is also true. People base a movie’s worth on whether it entertains or not.Art has
a higher purpose than entertainment. The Hulk is entertaining, but it tries to be artistic and
philosophical and fails miserably. The Dark Knight accomplishes both. One’s a lousy movie and
one isn’t.Both are entertaining.
This happens in music all the time as well. People think Michael Jackson sucks because he
sang cheesy lyrics over two chords. Well, he wasn’t trying to be Duke Ellington. He was trying
to make simple songs that would make people smile and dance and that were incredibly
memorable.
Did he succeed? Absolutely.
I’ve stuck mostly to movies and music as examples because I don’t know much about art and I
don’t watch much TV. But the same concepts apply. Get a basic feel for what you like and
what you don’t like. If you don’t know what the big deal is about something, Google it and read
other people’s perspectives until you get a basic understanding.
As for television, the same standards as movies apply. We’re actually kind of entering into a
new golden era of television. Ten years ago you couldn’t find a good TV show to save your life,
now they seem to be everywhere. I personally loved The Wire, Californication, and Breaking
Bad. I also religiously watch The Daily Show (best political commentary on TV) and South Park
(do I even really need to say anything?)
The point in all of this too, is that it should be fun. This isn’t homework. This is about finding
cool stuff out there that you will enjoy more and more. If you like something a lot, hop online
and learn a little more about it. This entire process should be enjoyable for you.
I recently swallowed my vomit and checked out Sex and the City at a friend’s recommendation.
I had had about six different girlfriends try to make me watch it with them, but I always refused.
It actually wasn’t that bad. Although the female characters were pretty solid stereotypes of
women (for better or worse), I didn’t find any of the male characters intriguing and the story arc
was painfully slow across multiple episodes. So I stopped after 6-7 episodes. I imagine if I was
less educated on relationships and romance, and maybe in my 30’s, I would find the show more
interesting though.
I also didn’t “get” Lil’ Wayne’s album from last year “Tha Carter III.” I had never listened to Lil’
Wayne before. But I sat down the other day and put it on repeat until I felt justified to form
some sort of opinion on it. It took a while to just get a handle on his rapping style. I read
AllMusic’s description of his eccentric personality and Wikipedia’s entry on his rap career. Both
helped me put his album in context as I discovered it’s a richly colorful, inventive and
sometimes distracted album. The number of guests and producers he has is staggering by
itself. Overall, I feel like I appreciate it although I feel like it may have been overhyped last year.
All in all, a good album which I’ll listen to again.
Try New Things: Before we finish up this section, you may be saying to yourself: “This is all
nice, but reading Hemingway or developing opinions on Chaucer or Bach will never get me laid
in a dance club.”
Well… touché.Although, I’ll make the following points:
1) Being a well-rounded individual with opinions will expand your demographics by quite a bit.
So yes, none of this is necessary if you want to date a woman who is dumb, uneducated and
has no interesting opinions. But if you want to date brilliant, vivacious women with artistic
sensibility, passion and class, then a lot of this is a prerequisite.
2) The second point I’ll make is what my high school literature teacher always told us: “You
read literature because you can never meet enough people.” What I take from this is yes, even
though reading Hemingway or Milton Friedman’s economic theories may not directly get you
laid in a dance club environment, what it will do is develop your perspective to be more varied,
allow you to be able to relate to more people’s experiences and ideas, and generally have a
wider body of knowledge for dealing with people in general.
Believe it or not, Hayek’s economic arguments for libertarianism have influenced my
perspectives on dating and relationships for the better. I know that may sound crazy, but it’s
true.
Anyone who has read a lot can tell you that the best ideas you take from a certain book often
have nothing to do with the book you read.
Many men have been caged into the same day-to-day grind, wasting away, spending their life
doing things they don’t truly enjoy and that don’t truly express their identity and personality.
- They go to work (often at a good job)
- They come home and unwind
- They watch the typical sports/sitcoms/movies
- On Fridays/Saturdays they hang out with the same 3-4 friends.
Often times, I meet guys who don’t even have this much variance and balance in their life.
They’re stuck in 60-80 per week jobs, they work two jobs, they have absolute no hobbies
outside of World of Warcraft, etc.
Now, there’s nothing “wrong” with the above list. It represents about 90% of the male
population between the ages of 20 and 40 in the western world.
But again, that’s the point: how are you going to differentiate yourself from the other 90% of
men out there.
Ask yourself: if you were lined up next to 10 random single men from your town, what would
make you stand out from them? Imagine a woman met all 10 of you in a row. What is there
about you that would stop her dead in her tracks and make her say, "Wow, this man is
unique?" What do you have that they don’t? What can you offer that most other men can’t?
Do you secretly write poetry in your spare time and hide it in your closet? Have you been
skydiving three times? Did you climb a glacier in the Alps once? Have you tried eating things
like snakes, worms, spiders? What have you done that’s cool and interesting and has shaped
you as a person?
What are your rough edges that people can’t find anywhere else? What have you done that
will make you stand out in her mind?
Take out a sheet of paper.
On one side, I want you to take 10 minutes and list unique things that you have done or
experienced that most people haven’t. It could be everything from climbing a mountain, to
writing your school’s play in high school, to recovering from cancer, to going on a 10-day
meditation retreat, to starting your own business in college.
Write things that you’ve done that no one or almost no one you know has done or
experienced.
Now, turn the paper over. Take 10 minutes and write all of the the things you want to do
before you die.Assuming money and time weren’t an issue, list everything you would do before
you died.
Some examples from my list: write a novel, see the pyramids, learn to box, live in Japan, speak
five languages, climb a mountain, etc. Go nuts. Write until you can’t think of anything else or
the 10 minutes are up.
Now, take a look at your lists.
1) If your first list has fewer than 10 things, you REALLY need to get out more.
2) If your second list has fewer than 10 things, you need to put yourself out there and start
trying new things and experiencing the world. You lack curiosity and ambition for quality
experience.
3) Pick three items from your second list and make it your goal to do them within the next year.
In the end, working all day and night to have a great job and make a ton of money provides
very superficial satisfaction. Enjoyment of life comes from varied life experience, not from
possessions.
The more life experience you indulge in, the more developed of a person you’ll become, the
more mature your perspective on life and people will become, the easier you’ll relate to women
and the more culture, worldliness and value you’ll seem to add to their lives.
Also, the more you invest in yourself, the less needy you become around women and the more
attractive you become.
Have Strong Opinions: A few weeks ago I received a text from a former client saying the
following: “I know this sounds stupid, but I just realized something. Simply having an opinion on
everything makes you cooler than half the other men out there.”
There’s a plague of indifference in our society. People who don’t ever step up and really find
something that they feel strongly about. Politics? Meh. Technology? Too complicated. Sports?
My hometown team.Art? Will Farrell is funny.
That’s about as deep as most people go.
If this describes you, then that’s fine, it’s pretty much the status quo. But realize that it makes
you just another guy… dime-a-dozen.So why would an attractive woman pick you?
And to our credit, this isn’t something only guys are afflicted by. Ever gone on a date with a girl
who has nothing more to talk about than her latest favorite tanning salon and the weather? I
have. Tons of times. It’s painful.
Women suffer from chronic indifference as well. In fact, what may happen — actually, what I
hope happens to you — is you take the advice from this article, start applying it, within a year
become a wellread, worldly, opinionated guy, and then you’ll email me because every girl you
meet seems painfully dull to the point that you are never needy around them. That’s kind of
the idea here.
But back to being average — the reason it’s so common stems from the same reason most
guys have a lot of trouble with women. We’ve been conditioned to be passive, to be needy, to
hide our vulnerability, to be Nice Guys.
If you don’t have any strong opinions on anything, then you’ll never ruffle anyone’s feathers,
never step on anyone’s toes, never polarize and attract, because you’d rather not be disliked
than risk being liked. What you’re doing is emotionally shutting yourself off from yourself. And
how can you emotionally connect with another person if you can’t emotionally connect with
yourself?
So as an exercise in developing a little passion and learning how to stand for something, I want
you to start doing this exercise. This is a “lifestyle” exercise that isn’t done on a sheet of paper
in five minutes, but it’s a thought that I want you to keep in your head as you go about your
everyday life.
When topics, ideas or thoughts come up, I want you to just ask yourself, “How do I feel about
that?”
If you see some news coverage on Obama’s Health Care plan, ask,“How do I feel about that?”
If you see the new South Park commercial, ask,“How do I feel about that?”
If you hear that your friend is going to New Zealand, ask,“How do I feel about that?”
You get the picture. Now, if you find yourself answering, “I really don’t care,” push yourself to
figure out something one way or the other.
What I mean is this: my ex-girlfriend went on a rant once about some girl on Facebook who has
a kid now. My ex-girlfriend was going on and on about how this girl was a single 21-year-old
mother and how awful it was and how she’s disgusted by it and how can that girl be happy,
blah, blah, blah…
Now, my first reaction, obviously, is “Who cares?” I really don’t care if some girl has a kid or not.
And Ireally don’t care if the only way I know of her is through my girlfriend’s Facebook.
But why is my ex-girlfriend going off about it? What did this girl ever do to her? I think my exgirlfriend
has more of an issue then the babymama ever did. My opinion is that my ex-girlfriend
needs to chill out and mind her own business. I said this.And although she got a little mad and
defensive at first, my ex ended up agreeing with me and thanked me because my perspective
really made an impact on her. It made her stop and think about her own feelings and biases.
And that’s rare. Most guys wouldn’t do that. They’d sit there and nod and tell their girlfriend,
“You’re right, that’s so messed up.” No ruffled feathers. No one dislikes me.
Another example: guy on the street corner handing out fliers for his church. He’s one of these
hardcore,Bible-belt ministry types. I always brush past these people. I don’t make eye contact, I
don’t say hello, I don’t even stop if they stand in front of me, I walk around them.
How do I feel about them? Nothing really, I don’t. But how do I feel about the entire situation?
Well, honestly, I find it kind of admirable whenever somebody finds something they value so
much they’re willing to stand on the street all day in the hope that they can share that
something with one person. That’s pretty cool.
On the other hand, Ireally don’t care to be that one person.
In other situations, it’s just a matter of education. How do you feel about the election? Have no
opinion, well try finding stuff out until you do.
Bringing It All Together
Developing an attractive lifestyle is a long-term process. It requires a consistent and
penetrating look at your actions, your habits and what you’ve chosen to do with most of your
time.
Your job, your hobbies, your friends, your interests, are these things mostly a result of what
was told to you or pushed on you, or are they things that you consciously evaluated and chose
based on how enriching and passionate they made you feel?
These are important questions. No one can live your life but you. And as long as you sleepwalk
through life not ever questioning or evaluating the lifestyle you’ve built for yourself, the
same behavioral patterns are likely to creep up over and over again.
Guys often don’t totally believe me, but poor lifestyle choices afflict all of your interactions and
communication when it comes to women. Poor lifestyle choices reflect a lack of investment in
yourself, which in turn causes you to be more needy around others for validation.
I first noticed this when I worked with guys who still lived at home with their parents. It was
bizarre, these guys said all the right things, approached whenever they wanted to, could even
flirt well most of the time.
Yet they got absolutely no results. Women never responded warmly to them, and they never
seemed quite as motivated or as confident.
Then, a few months later, I went home and lived with my mother for about six weeks for
personal reasons. During this period I noticed the same thing: my motivation to meet women
plummeted, my confidence and sense of independence became nothing, I didn’t seem excited
in my interactions.But as soon as I left and lived on my own again, everything came back.
There’s a certain baseline level of independence and self-sufficiency that your lifestyle must
give you for you to be able to move forward. If you’re constantly stressed by work, upset by
your friends, and in poor health, then no amount of work on your anxieties and communication
is going to help much. You’re effectively putting a ceiling on your development and your
potential with women. The other two parts of this book will not be much use to you. You can
try, but I can tell you, you probably won’t see much change in your results.
Get your life taken care of. Get healthy. Find a happy group of friends. Find a few hobbies that
you love. Develop opinions. Start caring about what you spend your time doing. This increases
your self-investment and will make you less needy around others. This in turn will give you the
courage to take the correct action and the wherewithal to communicate effectively. This is
honest living.
And once you’re living a life true to yourself, your values and your ideals, then it’s time to take
action.
Part IV: Honest Action
Chapter 10: What Are Your Stories?
“Life shrinks and expands in proportion to one’s courage.”
- Anais Nin
I park my car in front of the gym and immediately pop my iPod headphones into my ears.As I
get out and walk across the parking lot I catch a glimpse of a slender figure walking toward the
door from another angle. I look over.She’s hot.
We catch eyes and hold. She looks away, but only after holding my gaze for a half-second
longer than most people would.An instant of sexual tension pops up between us.
She walks into the gym about ten paces ahead of me. I check out her ass. It says “PINK.” It’s
those fuzzy kind of tight sweat suits girls wear some times. My mind immediately judges this.
For some reason I think she is trashy. I have to stop myself. What do I know?
For a moment we’re at the sign-in desk next to one another. I start scanning in my mind for
something to say to her. But before I settle on something her phone rings and she answers it.
“Oh god, one of those girls,” I instinctively say to myself. Again I have to stop myself. I don’t
know this girl.But obviously if I’m dedicating such mental energy to her, I probably should.
For a few seconds in my head I toy with some logistical scenarios that would allow me to talk
to her later… like pretend I have to go to the bathroom so I can come back and hopefully catch
her off her phone. No, that’s too contrived. I could just approach her in the gym while we’re
working out. But to be honest, that has never gone well for me in the past. Or maybe I do my
workout and try to time it so that I’m leaving when she is. Then I would feel like a stalker.
Theoretically, these things could work, but my mind’s losing interest. My headphones are
blaring and I’ve moved on to my workout for the evening.
I’m not going to lie and say that despite all of my hedging and indifference, that I magically
came up with some miraculous line that saved the day. Because I didn’t talk to her. In fact, I
don’t remember seeing her again or thinking of her until I wrote this. So I didn’t save the day.
But then again there was nothing wrong with my day and there still isn’t.
I’m also not going to sit here, as is typical with these types of books, and chastise myself for
bitching out, for being a pussy, and for not manning up. It’s not that big of a deal. And I’m also
not going to give you, my humble reader, yet another lecture on how you should never bitch
out, how you should always, always, always talk to her, no matter what you fucking pussy —
even if she’s at the gym, on the phone, juggling knives, doing a hand stand, changing a flat tire
or administering CPR — you always fucking talk to her, goddamnit… Right?
Let’s be honest, we all pass up dozens of situations like the above on a weekly basis, no
matter how experienced or inexperienced we are. We’ve all let hundreds, if not thousands of
opportunities go, usually without a thought or even realizing it. We’ve all done it. And we’ll all
continue to do it.
So I’m not here to rail on you to stop passing up opportunities. You already know the
opportunities you pass up. And I’m sure by now, you’ve had more than your fill of wouldacoulda-shoulda
moments. You don’t need me to tell you when you should have gotten off your
ass and done something.
I’m more interested in the stories you tell yourself. The stories that we all tell ourselves.Allow
me to explain…
When I got into this stuff seven years ago, I struggled with anxiety around women as much as
anyone as I’ve ever met. I’ve coached well over 150 guys since then, and I’ve maybe only met
3-5 guys who have had worse anxiety than I did when it comes to walking up to a woman and
speaking to her.
Jump to today. I rarely experience approach anxiety consciously anymore. That isn’t to say I’m
some sort of badass. I put in my time. I paid my dues.A lot of it was fun and a lot of it sucked
and was humiliating. But I did it. I grew. And I’m a better person for it now. Through the basic
rote exercise of meeting thousands of women in the most basic or ridiculous scenarios over
the years, most of that palpable fear — the hand sweating, the fast breathing, the mind going
blank — most of that is gone.
What’s not gone, and as far as I can tell, what will never be gone, is a continuing internal
resistance to change, whether it be through outright fear, or subtle subconscious thoughts
trying to sabotage me. That never stops. I don’t feel nervous anymore, but I do feel a dreadful
judgment and boredom. “Only prissy girls wear crap like that,” “Oh God, she’s one of those girls
who’s always on her phone. I don’t have time for this.” Sometimes it happens pre-approach.
Sometimes it happens 30 minutes in. Sometimes it happens on the second date. But always,
these judgments aren’t accurate portrayals of her. I don’t even know her. Yet I’m judging her.
It’s a defense mechanism. My conscious fear has disappeared, but my subconscious resistance
is still alive and kicking.
And from what I’ve observed, everybody’s subconscious defense mechanisms are still kicking.
The resistance doesn’t go away. It just changes shape. Over the years anxiety morphs into
apathy which morphs into arrogance. The resistance may come before meeting her or before
kissing her or before having sex or before committing to a relationship. We all have our own
weak spots, and those weaknesses each have their own form of resistance to the change we
want. One boundary simply gets pushed back into another and another.
Whether you feel incredibly nervous before you approach, or if you procrastinate calling women
you’ve met, or if you tell yourself that you just “don’t feel like” having sex when you’re out on a
date with a girl even though she’s obviously into you, this is your subconscious resisting
change. And your mind is inventing stories to explain that resistance. These stories have
emotions tied to them, whether they’re fear, boredom, anger, shame, or whatever — which
contribute to keeping you in the same place you are right now. It’s your emotional inertia. It’s
the status quo. The mechanisms wired into you to keep you there, safe.And we all have them.
Here are some other stories I’ve been telling myself lately: That I’m too good for these girls…
it’s my subconscious’s favorite story right now. I tell myself, “I’ve been with 25 girls hotter than
her, so why should I bother?” Yes, I recognize the myriad of things that are wrong with that
thought. Yes, I realize I’m totally pompous and full of shit when I think that. But that’s my point.
We’re all full of shit… a lot. All of our stories are. And we listen to them most of the time. We
believe them. I know mine’s dumb, just like yours probably is too. But that’s what pops into my
head. That’s the excuse I have to fight through these days.And for me, this one is a constant
battle.
Another one that’s been surfacing a lot is that I don’t follow up by phone/text enough because
I feel like I’ve somehow earned the right to not put effort into my interactions with women
anymore (if you ever wondered how teaching pick up and dating can kind of screw you up,
there’s a nice example).
I don’t call girls back as often as I should. I feel entitled for some reason. Like they should feel
grateful and just show up at my doorstep when I want them to. Sure, sometimes I genuinely
don’t really dig a girl and don’t care if I see her again. But other times I do and I regret not
putting in the extra effort a few weeks later.
These are my stories. They’re completely different now than they were three years ago. And
they were completely different three years ago than they were six years ago. But they’ve all
had the same purpose. To protect the status quo. My emotional inertia.
What stories do you tell yourself? Because until you’re aware of your stories, you’re not going
to be able to change your behavior. Maybe you get very nervous in bars and clubs and tell
yourself stories of inadequacy, “Girls like that only like tall guys with muscles.” Or maybe you
tell yourself, “I’ll start approaching after a few drinks.” Or maybe you tell yourself that you’re
always in too much of a hurry, too busy to stop and say hello to a woman in a coffee shop.
Maybe you tell yourself that you need to have something really amazing to say for her to like
you. So you stutter and stumble when talking to her, trying too hard and weirding her out.
Here’s a story to try out: maybe you’re already amazing.
Or how about this one? Maybe you tell yourself that you’re not even ready to go out yet. You
sit at home and read more books like this, telling yourself “Just a little bit more,” or “After I get a
raise and a new haircut,” or “once I save up to buy some nice clothes.” And then once you get
that raise, or get those clothes, then a new story pops up to take its place. You need to study
more inner game first. Or go on a diet. Then you’ll be ready.Yet six months have gone by.
It’s always something, isn’t it? There always seems to be something that you don’t have right
this second, that if you had it, you’d be able to act in the exact way that you’d like. Right?
So what are your stories? What do you tell yourself to justify that internal resistance inside
you? And what stories can you tell yourself instead to remove as much of that resistance as
possible?
People talk a lot about the idea of “skill” in all of this stuff. “Pick up is a skill. It needs to be
practiced.” Blah, blah, blah. I think as the years go on, it’s being proven over and over that what
you say isn’t so important, how you approach isn’t so important… What’s important is that you
move things forward without hesitation… without that resistance that you’re obeying right
now by doing nothing, by remaining in the status quo — the same resistance I listened to
today at the gym. That girl could have been the love of my life, the absolute perfect girl for me.
Who knows? I never will.
The only important "skill" in dating is learning how to stop buying into your own bullshit, to stop
believing your own stories. The resistance is constant. So you must constantly fight against it,
acknowledge the stories you create for yourself, look them in the eye and say, “You know
what, I don’t care if she’s on her phone and her ass says ‘PINK’ on it, I want to meet her.” And
then do it. Without hesitation. Without fear.And without apology.
Sure, you’ll have to flex your mental and emotional muscles, and build up your body of selfawareness…
but here’s the good news: those are the muscles chicks actually like.
Unfortunately, we all buy into our own bullshit. We all believe our own stories from time to time.
And chances are, the more anxiety and fear you have surrounding women and your sexuality,
the more of your own stories and bullshit you’ve bought into.
Defense Mechanisms
Most of us have a lot of fear and shame bundled up in our sexuality and ourselves. These fears
usually manifest themselves in a handful of very specific scenarios:
- Fear of approaching and starting a conversation with an attractive woman
- Fear of stating sexual interest either directly or indirectly (by asking for a phone number,
calling a phone number, asking out on a date, etc.)
- Fear of initiating sexual contact (typically the first kiss situation)
- Fear of actual sexual intercourse
I’m not going to hop into the debate about whether these fears are biological or socially
conditioned, as that’s not really important. My experience is that they’re mostly conditioned,
although some men probably have some genetic predispositions to certain anxieties more
than others, just as some people are more genetically predisposed to conditions such as
depression or alcoholism or whatever.
The point is the majority of men experience at least one of the above fears to some degree
when it comes to interacting with women. There are a minority of men who will be completely
devoid of one or more of the above fears and a very tiny minority who will be devoid of all of the
fears above.
These anxieties are manifestations of an unwillingness to be vulnerable. And as such, they
prevent you from building True Confidence. Typically, the less confident you are, the more
anxiety you’ll have.
I don’t know if these anxieties always existed or if they’re a recent phenomenon. But I do know
the statistics for anxiety disorders in the past few decades are horrifying. Our modern culture is
becoming more and more anxiety-ridden by the year.
The recent eruption in demand for dating advice is not a coincidence.
Why we have these sexual anxieties isn’t totally clear and there seems to be as many reasons
as there are people.
This is unscientific, but in my experience coaching and working with hundreds of men, I’ve
noticed correlations between high degrees of sexual anxiety and the following: lack of a father
figure growing up, emotionally abusive childhood, childhood traumas, strict religious upbringing,
strict cultural upbringing, bullying or social ostracism growing up.
The sad fact about anxiety is that once you have it, it’s there and figuring out why it’s there
doesn’t help much. You can either avoid it the rest of your life, or you can do something about
it.
We’re here to do something about it. This section of the book is called Honest Action for a
reason.
I personally think anxiety is the biggest culprit when it comes to preventing men from being
attractive and successfully meeting and dating women. You remove anxiety, and trial-anderror
will take care of most of the rest.
Anxiety, almost by its very definition, represents a high level of investment of your identity in
the opinion of others. Again, why this happens, I don’t know. But let’s say you get scared to
death to say anything when a beautiful girl sits down next to you. The fact that you’re scared
to death demonstrates a high level of investment and neediness in her opinion of you.
Why our egos and sense of self-worth have become so intimately tied to how receptive
women are to our sexuality lately, again, I don’t know.But they are.
This lack of confidence creates a fight-or-flight response in us — a surge of adrenaline, we
begin sweating, our mind starts zipping at a million miles a minute, thinking of everything and
nothing at once — and if we do manage to utter a word, chances are we stutter and sputter
and make a red-faced fool out of ourselves...
...leading to further anxiety the next time a beautiful girl sits down next to us.
This is a terrible conundrum, and almost all of us suffer from it. I suffered from it horribly and it
took me years to undo it. Hopefully with what I learned, it won’t take nearly as long or be nearly
as painful for you as it was for me.
The first step to overcoming your fears is to figure out what your pattern is.
When we are confronted with our fears or anxieties, we have a pattern or strategy that we
usually use to deal with them. For instance, my most common pattern is apathy. Whenever I’m
confronted with something I’m afraid of, I pretend — or scratch that, I convince myself — that I
don’t actually care. Over the years, working with hundreds of men, here are some the most
common patterns that I’ve noticed:
1. Blame Game — The Blame Game is where, when confronted with something he’s afraid of, a
man blames someone or something else for his fear.
For instance, let’s say you’re anxious about giving a presentation at work. Someone who does
the Blame Game will have a natural response to come up with reasons why his boss is stupid
and he’s way too smart to be doing this anyway and how it’s not his fault if things go wrong
because he’s been sick and so-and-so didn’t do enough research.
In the context of women, the Blame Game will often result in men convincing themselves of
stuff like, “Oh, she’s stuck up,” or “She’s just into guys who are good-looking,” or “She’s too
stupid for me anyway,” or “This club is too loud to talk to people,” or “Women in Miami are just
bitches, I need to find a new city.”
The excuses and blame can be petty and ridiculous but they can also run deep. The awful part
of the blame game is that with it come anger and frustration. And if you do it enough, the
anger will pile up and you will end up with some pretty bitter and irrational beliefs about women.
Men who have played the blame game their whole lives may develop screwed up beliefs like,
“All women care about is how much money a guy has,” or “All girls in bars are stupid and
shallow.” This can lead to some pretty dark places.
2. Apathy and Avoidance – This has always been my Achilles’ heel, and it’s quite common.
Apathy and avoidance is exactly as it says: it’s when a man convinces himself that he doesn’t
care or that it’s not important to him. I did this for years. I convinced myself that I didn’t care
about meeting women, and that it didn’t really matter if girls I liked didn’t find me attractive.
Well, after enough years of sitting home alone looking at porn while all of my friends were going
through girlfriend after girlfriend, I had a rude awakening: I do care.Apathy and avoidance isn’t
the worst response when avoiding our fears with women, in that it usually can’t last forever.
We’re biologically wired to pursue women so at some point instinct will win over. Where it is
dangerous is in other areas of our life such as career, family or hobbies. The apathy and
avoidance pattern is the root behind the couch potatoes and disgruntled office workers of the
world.
3. Intellectualizing – a popular one when it comes to men and dating advice. In fact, I guarantee
that this is part of the reason you’re here: you have some sort of fear, anxiety or pain related to
women, and instead of actually doing something about it, you got online and decided to look
up an answer that you could study.
Intellectualizing is sometimes beneficial in that you can learn a ton of information about a lot of
subjects, and sometimes, the intellectualizing will lead to more self-awareness and help clarify
what sort of action you need to take. But there are many men who use intellectualizing as just
another form of avoidance. It tends to be really smart guys too, which is a problem, because
the smarter you are, the more you’re able to intellectualize and convince yourself that you
need to learn and understand more.
But when it comes to women this is not the answer (says the guy who wrote a 300-page book
on women). Honestly, if you went out and talked to women for a year without ever reading a
word of dating advice, you’d probably do OK, assuming you were honest with yourself and able
to learn from your mistakes. Sure, this stuff all helps, but in the end, your best teacher is your
experience. There comes a certain point where learning more about a subject is no longer
beneficial and on the contrary, is just going to get you more mixed up and confused, since you
have no experience to actually apply your knowledge to.
Intellectualizing also ends up having a backlash. Once you study a subject enough, it can
actually increase your anxiety. By studying it so much you’ve put more pressure on yourself to
succeed and therefore build up higher expectations for yourself.
There are more patterns, but these three above are the main ones that I’ve run into with men
trying to overcome their anxieties.
Also, there’s a pattern within each of the responses to fear listed above: they avoid the fear
and they usually do it by convincing themselves of something that’s not necessarily true.
The blame game guy will convince himself that it’s her fault. The apathy guy will convince
himself that it doesn’t matter. The intellectualizing guy will convince himself that he needs to
learn and understand more first. In the end, they're all avoiding what they're afraid of.
Also, realize that no one uses just one defense mechanism. We all use each of them some of
the time… In fact, we may stack them on top of each other, for example: “I don’t care what the
girls think here, because they’re all stuck up bitches, so I’m going to go home," neatly stacks
apathy on top of blame.
With that said, we all seem to have a favorite pattern that we fall back on the most often.
The key to overcoming your fears is first and foremost to break your patterned response to
your fear. This requires a certain level of selfawareness and discipline.
So for instance, when I was learning to approach women, I had a lot of fear and anxiety. And
my pattern was apathy. So I’d be hanging out in a bar, see a cute girl I liked, and my immediate
reaction would be to say something like, “Eh, I don’t really feel like talking right now,” or “I don’t
feel like meeting girls right now.” This was complete bullshit. I had purposely gone out that
night for no other reason than to meet women. I had been reading books and websites all
week about nothing but meeting girls. I wanted to meet girls.
It wasn’t until I became aware of this pattern that I was able to start breaking it and forcing
myself to talk to that woman I wanted to talk to, even when my mind was telling me that I
didn’t want it.
So here are some helpful ways to break your own pattern:
1. Take a moment and think about what you’re most anxious about. Is it approaching? Is it
showing sexual interest? Is it asking a woman out? Is it the first kiss?
2. Now write down your pattern with it. So for instance, “Calling women, pattern is apathy,” or
“Approaching women, pattern is blame game.”
3. Now, create a goal for yourself, for instance, “Call every phone number I get, no matter how
much I don’t care.” Write it down.
4. Tell a friend or a buddy what you plan on doing and ask him to keep you accountable.
That last item is important. Sharing your fears and having someone keep you accountable is
integral to this whole process and makes it 10 times easier. Even the very act of sharing your
fear with someone who can empathize and understand goes a long way towards relieving the
pressure.
You Are Not a Victim
One assumption I’ve lived my life by for a long time now, goes like this: “If it’s a question of me
being screwed up, or masses of people being screwed up in the same way, then it’s far more
likely that it’s just me being screwed up.”
Just to name an obvious example. Men often come to me and say something like this: “I go out
and try to meet women, but the problem is all of the girls in my town are catty and immature.
So I guess I just need to move to a new city.”
Really? So, it’s not you who’s screwed up, it’s the 150,000+ single women in your city who are
all screwed up... in the exact same way... What are the odds of that?
Or you get men who claim that EVERY — not some, not most, but all — American women are
fickle and too individualistic. Or that all women who dress provocatively are immoral and
cheaters and would never make a good girlfriend.
Men make negative assumptions and stereotypes about millions of women for no other
reason than to shirk responsibility for their own shortcomings. This appears to me to be
nothing but a victim mentality and it pervades a lot of men’s thinking, some in more obvious
ways than others.
This doesn’t necessarily mean the general observations are wrong, it just means you’re
interpreting them in such a way to victimize yourself. Sure, American women may be more
fickle and pretentious than their European counterparts (then again, they may not be). Women
in your town might actually be more closed off than women in a bigger city (or they might not
be). But you’re choosing to let those observations be responsible for your own actions. This is
the definition of being overinvested in others and lacking confidence.
Humans stereotype for a reason: so that we can manage large chunks of information to orient
ourselves more efficiently. Often, stereotypes can be useful. But usually they’re not. Often
they’re nothing more than excuses — ways for us to avoid the blame and responsibility for not
being satisfied with our results.And these excuses hurt us, and shut us off from opportunities.
If we're blaming others, we're not learning.And if we're not learning, we're not improving.
So returning to the “women in my town are cold” example. Yeah, they may, on average, be
colder than say, Las Vegas women. But are all of them? No. Maybe 40%? 50%? But if you
write them all off as being cold and use it as an excuse and not take responsibility, you’re
effectively shutting yourself off from 50% of the women in your town.You’re effectively missing
out on hundreds of opportunities.
The same goes for complaints against American women. There are something like 40 million
single women in the US. And you truly believe you can’t find one good one? Whose fault is
that? It’s your fault. You’re being lazy. You’re being lazy and unfairly judging millions of women
all because you aren’t willing to take responsibility for your failures.
I believe strongly in taking responsibility for everything that happens to you in your life. Our
minds are always looking for ways to avoid pain and failure and rejection, and so they
constantly churn out rationalizations to keep us impeccable; it’s them who fucked up, not us.
We're fine. We did everything right. It's that fucked up world's fault we're not happy.
Blame is yet another form of investment and neediness. It’s prioritizing others over yourself.As
long as it’s their fault, then you don’t have to make yourself vulnerable.
But when one practices taking responsibility for everything that happens in one’s life, one
stops blaming others. It becomes less a question of blame and more a question of sacrifice. It’s
no longer their fault that you’re still single because they’re all cold bitches, but now it’s your
fault and a question of whether you’re willing to sacrifice the extra effort or not to find a
woman who isn’t a cold bitch. Taking responsibility and morphing blame into sacrifice
empowers you. It puts the ball in your court and returns you to the healthy reality that the only
person in this world who determines your success and failure is you.
The question of blame, responsibility and sacrifice is a profound one in relationships as well.
Dysfunctional relationships almost always crumble under the pressure of one person blaming
the other for their shortcomings or transgressions. Research has shown a direct correlation
between the amount of blame leveled between partners and their propensity to break up
(topic for another book). The recipe for a healthy and happy relationship is one where both
partners take responsibility for their own emotions and their choice to commit to the other.
Just to give you an example. Before I got into all of this dating advice stuff, I dated a girl for four
years in high school and college. I was madly in love with her and she ended up cheating on me
and leaving me for another guy. For a long time I blamed her and was very angry.
Rightly so.
But as time has gone on I’ve recognized a few things: 1) I wasn’t exactly boyfriend-of-the-year,
and in many ways, her cheating and leaving me wasn’t very surprising; 2) there were plenty of
warning signs that I chose to ignore or was just completely oblivious to; and 3) regardless of
her actions, I made a conscious choice to commit to her day in and day out, and the risk of
being cheated on was always a possibility in that commitment. The awful result of that
relationship was a possibility I had been aware of from day one. Yes, she did something shitty,
but I also chose to trust her.
In the end, I made the conscious decision that I was willing to sacrifice the risk of being hurt in
order to enjoy the commitment of our relationship. And I wouldn’t take that decision back. It
was my responsibility.
That’s an extreme example, but again, the application is ubiquitous. When I was younger, I
used to have a pretty stern love/hate relationship for superficial club girls. My style of game
was (and still is) very much intellectual and humor-based. I prefer to get women into interesting
conversations where I can show off my mental gymnastics.
For a long time, the ability to hook and attract drunk party girls in highend clubs eluded me. It
frustrated me for a long time and the ‘hate’ part of the love/hate was that I saw them as fickle,
stupid and shallow.
Now, that may be true, but I was blaming THEM for my lack of success with them. I mean, how
dare they not be attracted to me! If they weren’t so dumb, they’d be lining up to sleep with me,
and that’s how the world should be,right?
The truth was, I had to make a choice… was I willing to work to expand my communication in
order to connect with girls like that? At the end of the day, that’s the only relevant question:
the women you meet will be the women you meet, but are you willing to put in the effort to
make something of it? When I did, I found something out: that I don’t particularly enjoy women
like that, even if they are hot. Eventually, I was no longer willing to make that sacrifice. Is it their
fault for being who they are? No. Is it their fault I wasn’t able to get with them for so long? No.
Is it their fault that I often choose not to bother with them anymore? No.
It’s mine. I take full responsibility.
But I also discovered that not ALL of them are like that. In fact, many of them are smart,
interesting and fun — and beautiful! But until I opened myself up to that possibility and took it
upon myself to find them, I was missing out.
Challenge yourself to find the good and beautiful thing inside of everyone. It’s there. It’s your
job to find it. Not their job to show you.
Sexual Motivation
Another problem a lot of men run into, aside from their fears and their anxieties, is a seeming
lack of motivation to get out there and pursue women. It’s one thing to sit at home and read
books like this one, it’s something completely different to actually get off your ass on a
Saturday and go force yourself to meet women. It takes a lot of effort at first, and some men
are easily able to convince themselves that it may not be worth the effort.
Since the advent of internet pornography, it’s become easier than ever for men to satisfy their
sexual urges. And in 2011, there’s an entire generation that has grown up always having
access to as much pornography as they want since a young age.
There are a lot of anti-pornography movements, and there’re even theories about
“pornography addiction” that are thrown around. Although there’s no hard scientific evidence
(yet) for porn addiction. But here’s something I can tell you that is absolutely true: porn kills
your motivation to pursue women in real life.
There’s a bit of an epidemic of sexual apathy going on worldwide, where husbands, boyfriends
and even single men are turning to pornography rather than the real life women that they see
walking around every day.And it makes sense why: it’s easier, the women are hotter, the sex is
more exciting, it’s available at any time with the click of a mouse, it’s (usually) free, the girls
never say no, it’s emotionless and there are no obligations or commitments involved.
The problem is that there are some negative side effects. The first being that porn creates
very, very unrealistic expectations about sex, about women, and about sexuality. Porn makes
money by accentuating and exaggerating sexual ideals. Actual sex with an actual woman
often involves awkward moments of figuring out what she likes, what you like, who likes it
which way. It also often involves ecstatic moments of emotional intimacy, something porn can
never provide.
Also, real women, no matter how hot they are, have imperfections — imperfections that are
covered up in porn by make up and plastic surgery. If a guy gets too accustomed to the
perfectionism of porn, he’s going to have a lot more trouble becoming motivated by the girls he
sees every day.
The other problem is that porn is so easy, that it encourages men to masturbate... a lot.And as
we all know, as men, the more we masturbate, the more interested we become in food and
television, and the less we become in women and accomplishing something.
Napoleon Hill wrote a famous section in his classic work Think and Grow Rich called “Sexual
Transfiguration.” Hill noticed and theorized, that extremely successful men also had extremely
high sex drives. But not only did they have very high sex drives, but they channeled this sexual
energy into their work and their accomplishments. Often they would abstain from sex or
masturbation for long periods of time and would therefore feel more energized.
Science is starting to back this up. Orgasms, or more accurately, ejaculation in men, actually
causes a depletion of various hormones and endorphins which often lead to useful behaviors
as well as motivation.
Men who have masturbated constantly since adolescence often masturbate so hard and
furiously that they desensitize their penis to realistic scenarios. When you masturbate three
times a day for years straight, you often have to grip yourself very hard and rub furiously to get
off. This can often lead to sexual issues and impotence when a man actually does get into bed
with a woman. This is because vaginas are soft, they’re wet, and the sensations they give you
are subtle.Your iron-fisted grip does a horrible job of preparing you for the warm lady love.
So here’s what I recommend to you and all men who are looking to get motivated and improve
themselves. It’s my patented masturbation and porn diet that I give to men. In fact, I still go on
this diet myself from time to time when I want to add a little motivation to my life. It works
wonders, and a lot of men have gotten stunning results from it. I’ve talked to guys who literally
sat around reading dating advice for years without ever taking action, but on my masturbation
and porn diet, within two weeks they were out there meeting women and trying to get dates.
So without further ado...
- End all pornography immediately. Starting today. Delete everything from your computer.
Throw out any discs or DVDs you have. And if you have trouble controlling your urges,
download some free website blocking software and block every porn site you know of
indefinitely. This may sound horrible or extreme, but trust me.You will thank me in a month.
- Limit your masturbation to once a week. Schedule it. Pick a day. I usually pick Monday. Do not
deviate from your masturbation schedule! If you want even a larger dose of motivation (and
you want to be as horny as a 14-year old), limit your masturbation to once every other week.
Again, pick a day and hold yourself to it.
- When you masturbate, you’re only allowed to fantasize about women you’ve met and have
not had sex with. It could be that woman at work. That girl you met Saturday night. The girl you
have a date with that week. Whatever. But she has to be real, and she has to be someone you
have not slept with (but obviously want to).
- When you masturbate, use lotion or lube. Do it slower than usual. Drag it out longer than 10
minutes if you can. Take your time with it. Enjoy it. You don’t get to do this every day,
remember?
- When you’re out and about during your daily life, every beautiful woman you see, every hot
girl you talk to, I want you to imagine what it’d be like to have sex with her. Visualize it in your
head. Try to imagine her in her underwear. Imagine her giving you a blow job. Imagine railing her
right there on the street with everybody watching. Notice how turned on you get. Chances are
your desire to go talk to her is suddenly going to shoot through the roof.
Follow this for a few weeks and you should find yourself motivated. If you mess up or give in,
just start over again. Don’t be hard on yourself. Ideally, within a couple weeks the idea of going
out to approach women should sound exciting to you instead of a chore. This is good. So go
out and do it!
Chapter 11: How To Overcome Anxiety
“Courage is not the absence of fear, rather the judgment that something else is more important
than fear.”
- Ambrose Redmoon
T hink back to the last time someone you didn’t want to see tried to hang out with you. Maybe
it was that annoying guy at work. Maybe it was your black sheep brother-in-law. Maybe it was
a blind date your mother tried to set you up with her friend’s fat daughter. Think of that
awkward situation where you had to turn someone down. Think back to the last time you had
to politely come up with excuses to not spend time with somebody. How did it make you feel?
Not good.
Rejecting people, whether you’re doing it blatantly (“Go away and leave me alone”) or indirectly
(“Oh, I’m actually really busy this weekend, maybe another time”) is actually an awkward and
uncomfortable situation that nobody enjoys. Extremely few people in this world enjoy being an
asshole or hurting someone else’s feelings.
Now imagine having to do this on an almost daily basis. There’s nothing gratifying about it. In
fact, it becomes frustrating and tedious. It also explains why women seem to complain about
guys hitting on them or about guys being creepy — they have to reject them and rejecting
someone is generally an unpleasant or uncomfortable experience.
Men who have the perception of women as these ego-centric creatures who laugh at us from
their sexual mountaintops, doling out which man gets (a chance at) the divine pussy-access
and which man gets to squander away his time in solitude — it doesn’t work like that. Think
about it. Why do women spend so much time and effort on their appearance? Why do they go
to singles’ bars and join dating sites and give blind dates a try? They don’t do it so that they
can revel in rejecting a bunch of guys. They’re just as lonely and frustrated as we are. They
want to meet a man. But not just a man, a great man, a man who is confident, charming, fun
and interesting.
A man who is confident, who is vulnerable and who will honestly express himself to her.
She wants YOU to be that man. She’s secretly rooting for you. She doesn’t want to reject you.
Every time a new man walks up to her, she’s secretly saying to herself, “Please, please, please
be the man. Be the attractive man that I can’t say no to.” And then he nervously stutters
around buying her a drink and makes uncomfortable jokes about the weather and she’s back
to that horribly uncomfortable position of having to reject him again.
Other times it doesn’t even get that far… it’s obvious before he even opens his mouth that it’s
game over: he’s dressed like a clown or hasn’t combed his hair in three months, or he’s too
drunk to even look at her directly.
This is also why women are willing to overlook a lot of bonehead moves and mistakes we make
if they like us. It’s amazing how many second and third chances a woman will give you if she
likes you. She’s rooting for you. She’s your biggest fan. She’s saying, “Oh, he chickened out of
asking me out this time, but I’ll find an excuse to call him so maybe he’ll do it next time.” They’re
begging for you to succeed. They want it just as bad as you do.All of those women in the bars,
in the coffee shop, on the dating site, they want you to be that unbelievably attractive man,
that man who makes time stop for them and can make them feel things they’ve never felt
before. They want you to be that.And when they reject you, it’s not because they enjoy it, or
because they have a big ego, or because you’re too short or your muscles aren’t big enough…
It’s because you didn’t give her that feeling. You didn’t make her spin and fall and laugh and
forget where she was or who she was with. That’s what she goes out every night looking for:
the man who can make her feel more alive.
The next time you approach, when she sees you coming — and trust me, she usually sees you
coming — know that she’s already rooting for you. Secretly, she wants you to succeed as
much as you do.And for a moment she’s your biggest fan.
And your role as a man is to take action. It’s all on you. It’s always on you. You move things
forward.
And this is where the vast majority of men falter.An action as simple as opening your mouth,
moving your feet in the right direction or picking up the phone. They simply don’t do it. The fear
and rationalizations mentioned in the previous chapter are too large. It feels too overwhelming.
And nothing gets done.
And ultimately, no matter how much you read, how much study, how much you watch about
dating and attracting women, if you’re unable to take action, you will get nowhere.
Chances are if you’re reading this, this is not the first book on dating or attraction that you’ve
ever read. Some men become self-help and dating advice junkies, reading and reading and
reading and never taking action.
In fact, sometimes guys use reading and hoarding information and advice as a way to avoid
taking action. They feel like if they’re reading a 150-page book on attraction, then they’re
accomplishing something, right? And as long as they’re accomplishing something, then they
don’t have to confront what they’re afraid of: going out and standing in front of a woman and
expressing their truth, being vulnerable, subjecting themselves to rejection.
This isn’t a new problem. The self-help and business-advice industries have been dealing with
it for decades. The men’s dating advice has been dealing with it as well. But up until this point,
it’s done a pisspoor job of motivating men and helping to teach them how to take action.
The classic advice when it comes to guys taking action is more or less to jump into the deep
end until you learn to swim.
The idea was that if you had a crippling fear of approaching women, then you sign up for a
“bootcamp” or program where a coach takes you out to bar and more or less yells at you until
you approach 25 women in one night. What you say and what happens is all over the place,
but at least you’re getting off your ass and doing something.
The problem with the overload method of taking action is that it’s short-term and doesn’t
create a lasting habit. There’s a simpler and less stressful method for achieving long-term
results over your anxieties.
The Guide to Overcoming Your Anxiety
Fear is normal. Everyone has it in some form, and it's not going away any time soon. The trick
isn't to eliminate it; it's simply to train yourself to behave despite it.
Even many of the forward-thinking dating coaches in the industry who have finally come to
recognize fear and hesitance as the major culprit of most men’s lack of success, have failed to
recognize this: fear is never eliminated, it is eased and adapted.
Saying you want to get rid of all of your fear is like saying you want to get rid of all anger, or all
sadness. This sounds like a noble goal, but research shows we instead suppress or avoid the
emotions, leaving us less capable of dealing with them the next time they arise. Instead, what I
recommend is to learn to adapt our negative emotions into positive behavior.
For instance, people with anger issues are encouraged to channel their anger through
productive means — exercising, working, writing letters displaying their feelings, etc. To avoid
or ignore the anger will only bring it back worse next time.
When my first girlfriend broke up with me, I made a conscious decision. I had laid in bed
depressed for a week or two before I realized how ridiculous and pointless it was. I was hurt
and I was angry, but laying around in bed and avoiding her was stressing me out. If I’m going to
be stressed out, I may as well be productive.
So I decided to try another strategy. I decided that I would work on myself. I told myself I was
doing it so that she would be sorry she ever broke up with me. I did it out of spite. My
inspiration for selfimprovement began with revenge.
For the first time in my life, I joined a gym. I began studying more. I went out with a female friend
and bought some new clothes. I went to parties with new people I met. The whole time my
motivation was the anger and hurt that I had towards my ex-girlfriend. I was going to become
such an amazing person, she'd be sorry she ever left me.
The same concept can be applied to your fear and anxiety around women.
The other problem with interpreting the anxiety around women as something that must be
removed is that this often only serves to amplify it.
Neurobiology has shown us that attempting to avoid or shut out something we’re afraid of only
serves to make that fear stronger.
For instance, if you’ve ever played a sport and were in a situation where you had to hit one
shot to win the game, you know that thinking about the pressure and the situation and trying
to be relaxed about it only makes you more nervous and anxious.
The actual way to deal with it is to accept it, embrace it, and harness it to make your
performance better.
In Buddhism, there’s a saying that, “What you resist will persist.” And it’s true in this case as
well.
The proper way to handle your fear and your anxiety is to accept it, recognize that it’s normal
and a part of who you are, and to not even try to hide it from the girl.
Think back to something you’re very, very good at. Maybe you’re really great at some part of
your job at work. Or maybe you used to be awesome at tennis or chess back in school. Maybe
you’re a great public speaker.
All of those activities, when you were called on to put yourself on the line (major tennis match,
big presentation, major meeting to lead), you probably got nervous beforehand. But did that
nervousness make you crumble or did it invigorate you?
I used to love giving presentations in school. I was great at them. I used to get nervous before
every single one. In fact, I’ve given probably 75 seminars and speaking engagements for my
business over the past five years. I was nervous before every single one of those too.
But the nervousness almost felt good. I was confident in my ability. It was a borderline
excitement. I knew I was going to blow everybody away. I knew that they would love me. So
even though I was nervous to get up there, I couldn’t wait.
It’s like professional athletes who say they can’t sleep the night before a big game. They’re
nervous, but they can’t wait to get out there. They’re confident in their ability and thrive on the
pressure and the anxiety.
Psychological research actually shows that people perform better at activities under a certain
amount of anxiety. In fact, what matters isn’t the anxiety itself, but the person’s confidence in
their own ability to perform whatever action they’re anxious about.
So it’s less about the anxiety and more about how competent you feel you are. The less
competent you feel, the more the anxiety will hinder you, the more confident you are in your
ability, the more the anxiety will help you.
This is actually where a lot of dating advice and pick up theory actually hurts you. They explain
these complicated models and theories, give you tons of material to memorize and practice,
and present picking up women as some complicated task akin to rocket science that only
works once you’ve tried and failed 1,000 times. That’s going to scare the shit out of any guy
with little to no experience.
The opposite is true.Attracting women is not complicated.And if you can have a conversation
with anyone, then you are capable of attracting a woman. There’s nothing to learn, only things
to do.And the fear doesn’t go away, you learn to hone it to help you.
I still get nervous every time I approach a beautiful woman I don’t know. I’ve approached
probably over 2,000 at this point. I still get nervous every time I go to kiss one.And I’ve probably
kissed at least 300 at this point. I still get nervous every time I bring a new girl home.And I’ve
slept with over 100 women.
The fear never goes away. What changes is my confidence and vulnerability. The difference
between now and 2005, is that back in 2005, I was incredibly unconfident and highly invested
in how women perceived me and incredibly unconfident in my own ability to interact with
women. These combined to amplify my anxiety in ways that were unbearable.
See, a lot of people assume True Confidence means being fearless. But confidence simply
means to feel the fear and not let it define you. True Confidence is feeling the fear and
deciding that something else is more important.
If I say or do something that screws everything up (and I still do all the time), I don’t really care.
It doesn’t change how I feel about myself, and it doesn’t change my confidence in my ability to
interact with women in the future.
What’s important is not the level of anxiety or fear, but your competence at whatever you’re
afraid of doing.
So now you’re probably saying, “Well, that’s nice, you’re that confident because you’ve been
with so many women, but what about a guy who has little to no experience with women?”
Glad you asked.
Because there IS a way to slowly build up your confidence and competence and to slowly
desensitize yourself to your anxiety.
In the past, when it came to dealing with fear and rejection, all dating coaches basically took
the approach of “throw him into the deep end and hope he learns to swim.”
If you were afraid to approach random women, they would give you crazy lines or push you into
very intimidating and difficult social situations, hoping to “scare you straight.”
The idea was if they could put you in the worst possible situations, then the simple, regular
social situations would stop being intimidating.
I guess it’s like taking someone who wants to get in shape and putting them in a marathon
right away. It’ll help, but wow, it is not going to be pretty or pleasant. So that marathon —
despite how ridiculously painful and difficult it is — will only give someone some good exercise
once, it won't create a habit.
If that’s it and they never exercise again, then they’re going to revert back to their old out-ofshape
selves.
The same is true with our fears.
The way to attack anxieties is through incremental, consistent exposure. Not a single, extreme
exposure.
So for instance, you would take a few hours each afternoon or maybe your lunch break each
day and make a point to approach a few women just asking for the time.
Nothing more is required, just what time it is.
Find something easy, but repeat it regularly for a while, until it doesn’t feel difficult anymore.
Then the next day, you go out and ask 10 women what time it is followed by, “How is your day
going?”
And each day, you slowly make it harder and more intensive.
Slowly work up until you’re able to approach women by telling them you think they’re attractive
and asking them out on a date. You’ll be surprised how quickly you can get comfortable doing
this.
In fact, if you’re like most guys and stick with it, then you’ll begin to get hooked to the
adrenaline rush and actually enjoy the butterflies you get when you approach a new woman.
Eventually you’ll be able to approach any woman in any circumstance and express your
interest in her... with confidence, without worrying about what to say or what line to use.
And you can apply this to all sorts of situations: getting physical with women, emailing women
online, calling phone numbers, sexual humor, conversations with women, etc., etc.
It’s just a matter of knowing how to structure your exposure. Afraid to kiss girls on a date?
Challenge yourself first to hold their hand. Once you’ve done that a few times, then challenge
yourself to put your arm around them and leave it there. Once you’ve done that a few times,
then challenge yourself to kiss them on the cheek.And finally, challenge yourself to go for the
kiss itself.
All of these goals can be done with the same girl, and even on the same date. But the
important part is to stair-step your approach rather than expecting yourself to immediately be
banging girls by the dozen after a week.
Get creative. Other sticking points this method can be applied to:
- Stalling out in conversation.Being comfortable talking about yourself.
- Calling girls and asking them out on dates.
- Going for sex once you’ve been out on a date with a girl.
- Flirting and teasing women.
- Showing direct interest.Stating that you’re attracted to them.
Really all it takes is a focused and concerted effort on your part without actually expecting
yourself to go from 0 to 100 in one night. Instead, you’ll slowly but surely gain little successes
repeatedly, not only building your competence and confidence, but making the whole process a
lot more enjoyable, therefore helping you get over your anxiety.
And the great thing about this method is that as you get accustomed to your anxiety and
become more confident in your ability, you’ll be even more motivated to meet and date even
more women, increasing your confidence and competence further, and easing your anxiety
that much more.
There’s momentum to it, which is absolutely integral to developing a healthy and successful
love life.
The last thing I’ll say about this method before moving on, is that you should only focus on one
thing at a time.And when I say “focus” on one thing at a time, I really mean only quantify one
aspect of your interactions at a time.
So if you want to be less nervous approaching women, don’t bother yourself worrying about
how to get phone numbers or when to go for the kiss or what texts you should be writing. Just
focus on approaching.
But by the same token, when you’re focusing on getting physical and aggressive with women,
don’t worry about approaching.A very common form of avoidance for men who are terrified of
“later stage” parts of dating women — escalating, sex, dates, etc. — is that they’ll actually use
approaching more women as a form of avoidance. They’ll have a beautiful woman totally
enrapt with them, and instead of seeing how far they can push things they’ll take her number
and move on, because they tell themselves they want to keep “working on approaches.” When
approaching is not their problem. Getting sexual with women is!
Again, some self-awareness is critical. Take things one at a time, stairstep them slowly until
you get not only comfortable with it, but excited about it, and then move on to the next thing.
That excitement and enthusiasm will bleed over into the next form of anxiety and motivate
you to keep going.
For example, a guy who is scared to approach women should stair-step approaches until he
enjoys approaching. Then use that enjoyment to stair-step his way up displaying more interest
and communicating more openly. Then use his enjoyment and the adrenaline from that to
stairstep his way up being physical with women. Soon, he’ll be getting laid and dating some
very cool women.
If this sounds like a lot of work, it’s actually not. It’s actually quite simple and if you’re focused
about it and don’t get distracted with all sorts of mundane and extraneous theory, it’s very
straightforward and can be accomplished quickly.
I’ve taken guys who have never approached a woman in their life and gotten them walking up
to beautiful women on the street and asking for coffee dates within a matter of days. I’ve now
helped three guys lose their virginity within weeks of using this method. One of them was 29
years old. One of them was 25 years old.Another client of mine slept with two new girls in the
same weekend after applying these principles.
If you’d like more information on how to apply these concepts to your own life with quick
results, check out the “Further Reading” section at the end of this book.
Courage and Boldness
Feeling fear and acting despite of it builds courage.Any time you’re afraid to do something and
feel some invisible force holding you back, yet you push through it anyway, you’re building
courage within yourself.
Courage is a habit. Courage is a form of discipline. It’s taking a certain action even though you
feel like doing something else. The difference here is that courage involves acting against fear,
whereas discipline involves acting against laziness or fatigue.
Courage is built like a muscle. The stair-stepped exercises in the previous section are designed
to progressively build your courage. The more courage you build, the more you’ll be capable of
bold actions.Bold actions require a lot of vulnerability and build True Confidence.
Stopping a woman and asking her for the time requires little courage and is not a bold action.
It’s well within social norms.
Walking up to a group of six people sitting down, asking to speak to the most attractive
woman for a moment, telling her that you find her beautiful and you’d like to take her out
sometime, is quite bold. It’s bold because it requires a lot of courage to disrupt social norms and
it requires quite a bit of vulnerability.
But there’s a caveat here. You must know that you’re interrupting social norms. You must
acknowledge that what you are doing is unusual. If you don’t, you’ll be seen as someone who is
out of touch and oblivious, which is not attractive.
This is a common mistake that many of the Social Disconnect types make.Since they’re so out
of tune with social norms, they often have no problem behaving in a bold way. The problem is,
they aren’t aware of when they’re being bold or not.
For instance, I once worked with a guy who was very socially disconnected. We were in a
shopping mall and we were walking around talking to women together.
As we were going down an escalator, we saw a very attractive girl going up the escalator on
the other side.As we passed her I mentioned to him that he should talk to her.
He immediately began running up the down escalator and began talking to her.
Obviously, this is a very awkward and strange thing to do. And had he been aware of how
awkward and strange it was, he would have been bold. But instead, he was just unaware, and
as such he immediately creeped the girl out.
This is why if you’re ever going to do something that is unusual — approach a woman in a
strange location, try to kiss her in a strange location, invite her out with you after just meeting
her, etc.— it’s important that you communicate that you realize what you’re doing is abnormal.
“You know, I’ve never done this before, and I know we just met, but why don’t you come to the
restaurant with me?”
“Excuse me, this is kind of random, but I thought you were cute and wanted to meet you.”
The more bold your action, the greater attraction you’re going to create. The more bold the
action, the more vulnerability you show, and the more you polarize responses.
If you walk around and ask women for the time, you are not polarizing them very much. Most of
them will give you the time. The worst rejection you’ll ever get may be, “Oh sorry, I don’t have a
watch,” or something similar.
But if you walk around and ask women on dates, you’re going to get polarized reactions —
nervous and excited yeses, and tense and reserved nos. If you go even further and try to kiss a
woman at an unexpected time, you’re either going to get a very enthusiastic yes or an
enthusiastic no.
The point is: greater boldness leads to greater polarization. This is yet another argument for
behaving in an aggressive manner. This is also why one of my mantras that I tell guys is,
“Always err on the side of aggression.”
Whenever you’re in doubt of what you should do, err on the side of aggression. Choose the
bolder action. Because if you wait around for the safer and less bold opportunity to make a
move on her, chances are the attraction will be less or may even dwindle.
But bold behavior by itself will only go so far. Boldness must be molded by charismatic and
efficient communication. Just behaving recklessly and without abandon will attract women to
you, and will give you sexual opportunities (particularly in club and party environments), but
without communicating in a charming and interesting manner, and without being aware of
social norms, it’s unlikely you’ll get many women to stick around, and your relationships will not
be that enjoyable.
You can build up an incredibly attractive lifestyle and persona, focus on the proper
demographic, act boldly and pursue women shamelessly, but if you can’t communicate your
intentions and your personality well to them, then it will be hard to maintain their interest for
very long.
The fifth part will cover how to revamp your communication and how to make good
impressions on everyone you meet.
Part V: Honest Communication
Chapter 12: Your Intentions
“The highest forms of human understanding we can achieve are laughter and human
compassion.”
- Richard Feynman, Physicist
I n Chapter 4, we talked about how vulnerability only holds weight when it’s communicated
unconditionally — i.e., when you compliment a girl or express yourself, you’re not doing it with
an ulterior motive, you’re simply expressing yourself.
In this chapter, I’d like to take that idea further.
You could say men and women almost speak two entirely different languages. Men mostly
communicate through facts, stories and data. We discuss sports statistics, how we fixed our
car last weekend and where we plan on going next month. If a man says, “I’ll see you at 6PM,”
he typically means it literally. If a man tells you that he used to be the best basketball player at
his college, you take it at face value, even if he may be exaggerating a little bit. If a man says
he dislikes you, then it means he’s not your friend anymore and you move on.
Women communicate more in feelings and specifically, through intentions. Sure, they still pay
attention to the facts and stories going on on the surface, but what’s actually communicated
to them is the intention and feeling underneath.
This is sub-communication.
This is why your girlfriend can get upset and tell you she hates it when you spend time with
your friends one night and then the next night insist you go to your weekly bowling league and
not see any contradiction in her statements. On the first night, she felt like you weren’t paying
enough attention to her. On the second, she felt secure with you and wants you to be happy.
The issue wasn’t actually your friends, it was simply her feeling valued.
Needless to say, this sort of stuff often confuses the hell out of men, often for an entire
lifetime.
This is why men often refer women to “crazy,” “psychotic,” “unstable,” “irrational,” or “total
bitches.”
The fact that men are oblivious to the emotions and intentions that underline everything
women say often makes women feel like men are “heartless,” “cold," "assholes,” “selfish jerks,”
or that they “don’t listen.”
We listen, we’re just not accustomed to sub-communication.
This is also why a man can study and learn the best pick up lines and routines, walk into a bar
and deliver them perfectly and have none of them work. The woman hears his lines, but she’s
listening to his intentions. And if his intentions are saying, “I want to impress you, please like
me,” then it doesn’t matter how good the lines are.She’s not going to listen to him.
On the other hand, if a man has the right intentions, then he can get away saying just about
anything. In Chapter 4, I told the story of the time my friend walked around asking women if he
could pee in their butt. Obviously, his words were absolutely ridiculous, and all of the women he
approached — both the ones who rejected him and the one he went home with — didn’t give
his words much credit.
But his intention was loud and clear: I don’t care what you think, I want to have fun tonight, and
my idea of fun is a little extreme. Obviously, this scared a few women off. But once he found
one who liked his intentions, she latched on quickly and hard.
That’s an extreme example, but here’s another, much more common example.
Pick up advice often tells men not to compliment a woman too early or too often. The reason
for this is that most men who read pick up advice have poor intentions: they’re unconfident
and looking to validate themselves through sex or female affection. So when a man
compliments a woman out of neediness, it’s going to make a woman feel uncomfortable and
objectified.
Now if a man compliments a woman out of genuine appreciation for her, she’s going to hear his
intention and be genuinely appreciative of him as well.
Teasing and so-called “negging” of women is another great example. Many men, when they
first begin trying to flirt with women, they tease them or “neg” them. Ask yourself this, what’s
the difference between a tease and an insult? Both are derogatory statements. Both often
incorporate humor.So what’s the difference?
Intention. Teasing is done with a fun and positive intention. Insults are done with a negative
intention.
Or what’s the difference between sharing yourself and bragging? Let’s say you play in a
successful rock band. What’s the difference between sharing your life experience with a
woman (attractive) and bragging to her (unattractive)?
Hopefully you’re catching on by now: it’s intention. What is your intention? Are you trying to
impress her (unconfident) and therefore bragging? Or are you sharing yourself (vulnerability)
and therefore polarizing her?
This relates directly back to what we talked about in Chapter 2 in regards to investment,
confidence and validation. A man who is highly needy will have intentions dominated by
seeking validation and therefore be unattractive regardless of just about anything he says. A
man who is not needy will have intentions dominated by vulnerability and will therefore be
attractive regardless of what he says.
Obviously, there are technical considerations in how you communicate to people, which we’ll
cover throughout this chapter and next. But the overarching point is that what you actually
talk about has far less influence on your results than your intentions.
Everything in this chapter and next assumes you are acting based on the right intentions. As
mentioned in Chapter 6, if you seem to get rejected by women no matter what you do or say,
then chances are your intentions are poor and you’re unaware of it. If that’s the case, then I
recommend taking a long, hard look at why you’re approaching women and your beliefs and
feelings about women to see how you’re being perceived by them. Work on yourself first.
Remember, women don’t see your features, they see how you present yourself. They don’t
hear your words, they hear your intentions. If you suffer from chronic rejection, then you are
presenting yourself poorly and/or have poor intentions. In both cases, you’re unconfident and
therefore will always be seen as unattractive until you take care of it.
Creepiness
The number one fear deterring men from openly expressing their sexual desires towards
women is a fear of being perceived as “creepy.”
There are a lot of reasons for this. I’ll spare you the anti-feminism rant that often slips into
shaming men for their desires. The point is, most modern men have a legitimate fear of being
creepy.
Before we jump into what creepiness is exactly, and what women mean when they complain
about it, I need to give the same type of painfultruth serum I gave for rejection:
There’s no such thing as a man who is good with women who isn’t also creepy some of the
time.
The fact of life is that if you are a man who expresses his sexuality freely (and you should),
some women, some of the time, are going to find you creepy. It’s simply unavoidable. No matter
how cool, rich, good-looking and charming you are, at some point, somewhere a woman is
going to be creeped out by you. Live with it.
So as a friend of mine says, “give yourself permission to be creepy.” There’s no other way.And
look, it’s not the end of the world. There’s no Creepy Police who come and handcuff you and
take you away for creeping on some girls every now and then.
Creepiness is one of these vague concepts that everyone knows but no one can really put into
words. If you ask women what creepiness is, they’ll give you roundabout answers and
inevitably fall into examples of creepiness rather than an actual definition.
Of course, their examples are all over the map and seem to have absolutely no rhyme or
reason to them.
(For what it’s worth, asking a bunch of female friends this question over the years, I’ve gotten
examples of creepiness that have spanned from “he had dainty hands” to “he sips his drink like
a girl,” to “putting too many smileys in text messages.” As is often the case, women are terrible
authorities on why they like/dislike something, all they know is that they like/dislike it.)
Creepiness: behaving in a way that threatens a woman sexually or causes her to feel insecure.
Remember, the basis of all female attraction comes back to security. It’s why she looks for men
less needy than herself. It’s why she’s attracted to status and confidence. It’s also why she
looks for men who speak and behave in line with their intentions.
The further you get out of line with your intentions, the creepier you become. For instance, if
you approach a woman and stand there and talk about the weather, but she can tell that
you’re horny and want to rail her like a jackhammer, then you will come across as creepy. Your
actions and words are completely out of line with your intentions.
If you approach a woman and stare at her breasts the entire time you speak to her, you will
also be creepy. Even if you tell her honestly, “You have great tits,” you will be creepy. Not for
lack of intention, but because she doesn’t know you and most women are not comfortable
being sexual around men they don’t know.
This is why vulnerability is so huge. When you’re vulnerable around someone you don’t know,
they will trust you and become more vulnerable around you in return. The more vulnerable a
woman is willing to be around you, the less likely you will be to creep her out.
(Caveat 1: Vulnerability is still subject to the right intentions. If you tell a girl a sob story for no
other reason than to get her to feel sorry for you and sleep with you, then guess what, you’re
still creepy!)
(Caveat 2: Sex can be viewed as the ultimate act of vulnerability for a woman. The more
vulnerable you make yourself around her — by leading, by sharing your intentions, by being
honest — the more she will trust you and become vulnerable in return. Sex is a side-effect of
that vulnerability.)
Paradoxically, the way to interact with women in a vulnerable way, and therefore the way to
combat creepiness, is to accept that some women will find you creepy some of the time. Just
as with rejection, the more you’re willing to risk it, the less it will happen.
The more comfortable you are with women finding you creepy, and the more uninhibited and
vulnerable your actions and words are around women, and the more aware and respectful you
are of their interests and desires, the less likely they will be to find you creepy. The more
reserved and closed up you are about your intentions, the more you attempt to manipulate her
and mislead her about what you want and who you are, the more you disregard her feelings
and actions toward you, the more likely you are to become creepy.
Obviously, there are technical aspects of communication that affect this as well. Bad body
language, strange conversation topics, uncalibrated humor, inappropriate touching — these
things can all make you creepy even with the best of intentions. This is why I say that at some
point you have to accept that you’re going to creep some women out and that’s OK. Because
the alternative is to hide your sexuality and hope a woman comes to you... and well, we all
know how well that works out.
Sexual Tension
Flirting is the opposite of creepiness. Flirting is expressing your sexuality in a way that is
attractive and fun to women. Sometimes the sexuality of your behavior is overt, sometimes it’s
subtle, sometimes it’s implied. But when done correctly, it’s accepted and appreciated by
women.
If you research dating advice and pick up tips, you’ll find dozens and dozens of methods of
“building attraction” with women.Some of the more popular ones include:
Teasing, bantering, negging, cocky/funny, push/pull, qualification, statements of interest, false
disqualifiers, roleplaying, leading and pacing, eliciting values, magic tricks, cold-reading, false
takeaways, word games, hand games, betting and competition, etc.
Chances are, you’ve read or are familiar with at least a few of these concepts. If you don’t
know what most of them are, then good, don’t worry about it. No, I’m serious, don’t worry about
it, because they all follow the same basic pattern.
Flirting: Expressing your sexuality to a woman in a confident manner, eliciting her to become
more attracted to you.
In a nutshell, what a lot of men refer to as “game” is their ability to flirt with women. How well
can they express their sexuality to women with positive responses? If they can do it often,
they have “game.”
The tactics or strategies used to do this (teasing, etc.) all do this in their own ways, but they all
follow the same pattern. For the sake of time and space (and boredom), I’ll be grouping most
methods of flirting into two different groups: teasing and boldness. Both teasing and leading
types of flirting (whether it’s negging, false takeaways, or roleplaying) follow the same basic
formula... they all involve generating sexual tension.
Scientific research shows that sexual tension builds when uncertainty of sexual possibilities is
presented into an interaction.
Teasing type behaviors generate sexual tension because they generate uncertainty as to
whether you’re actually interested in a woman or not.
If you joke around with a woman about her hair, and smile and make her laugh and single her
out with your attention while doing it, you’re sending mixed signals: your intentions are sending
a “Yes, I like you,” signal, while your words are sending a, “No, I don’t,” signal. This generates
tension and uncertainty and sexual tension. It makes her a little less certain of your feelings or
what you are going to decide to do.
Introducing sexual innuendo does the same thing—it suddenly forces both of you to think
about the sexual implications of what’s being said, thus creating uncertainty.
This is why most dating advice in western culture, to both men AND women, encourages you
to send mixed messages, “play hard to get,” or play games with one another. Sure, it distorts
intentions, but it also generates uncertainty and therefore, sexual tension.
But one can flirt by being clear with one’s intentions as well. One can state one’s sexual
desires clearly or actually even move to make those sexual desires happen. It’s counterintuitive,
but this can generate a lot of uncertainty and sexual tension as well.
For instance, let’s say you meet a woman and just come right out and say, “I think you’re
beautiful, I’d like to take you on a date.”
A lot of men cringe at this idea. Nice Guys hate it because they think it will make them creepy.
False Confidence guys hate it because they believe they’re giving their power away.
But in actuality, it’s one of the most powerful and practical things you can say. Not only is it
vulnerable and all of that, as we’ve discussed at length, but it also builds far more sexual
tension.
But how? If she already knows you like her, how can it build tension? There’s no uncertainty.
This is how:
1. First of all, a direct statement like that is polarizing. So if a woman is not interested in you,
she will let you know then and there. If she sticks around and keeps talking to you, then it
means she’s interesting. This way, you immediately know where you stand with a woman.
2. Women are turned on by being desired, remember? They are aroused by men who perform
bold behaviors towards them.So it turns her on.
3. It also demonstrates your True Confidence and makes you more attractive as a confident
man.
4. So no we have an aroused woman who is interested, and an attractive man who is bold and
vulnerable.And both have implicitly or explicitly suggested sexual interest. Suddenly this opens
up all sorts of new questions and opportunities: What is going to happen? How are we going to
get along? Is he good in bed? I wonder if he’ll kiss me? I wonder what he looks like naked? Etc.
See, if a man is having an innocuous conversation with a bunch of small talk, there is never any
uncertainty in the woman’s mind as to where things stand. The conversation is shallow and
simple and so there’s no question as to why they’re talking or the significance of what they’re
talking about.
If a man begins to flirt with a woman by teasing her, then suddenly he adds a new dimension
by creating uncertainty: Does he like me or not? Why is he flirting with me?
But if a man goes the bold and vulnerable route, and is willing to risk rejection, he is rewarded
by creating massive amounts of sexual tension.
Of course this is often easier said than done. Flirting this way requires showing vulnerability,
risking rejection or offending someone.And at first, you may flirt in needy and supplicant ways,
repelling women even faster than you did when you were just a Nice Guy. But eventually,
exposing yourself and your sexual desires will force you to be less invested, less needy, more
dominant and more attractive. The teasing will help by creating the perception of nonneediness,
and the leading will make women more and more receptive to your eventual sexual
advances.
But unlike fears or living an attractive lifestyle, flirting and expressing your sexuality requires
communicating effectively. It requires competency at certain social behaviors. And social
behaviors, like any other kind of behavior, aren’t simply picked up overnight. They must be built
and honed through practice. The specifics of which will be covered in the next chapter.
Developing an Emotional Connection
Your ability to connect with a woman emotionally is proportional to how self-aware you are of
your own emotional processes and motivations.
As described in Chapter 3, self-awareness and vulnerability will actually cause you to behave in
a more confident manner, but selfawareness and vulnerability also give her the chance to
know the “real you,” to trust you and to open her own emotions up to you.
Ultimately, this is what most woman want. If you look at romance novels — basically the female
version of porn — they all follow more or less the exact same pattern: hard and rugged badboy
type male hero is troubled but strong, and as he slowly opens up and shares his true
emotions and desires with the heroine, she’s able to support him, to save him and ultimately
fall in love with him. Of course, they live happily ever after.
This is more or less the blueprint of seduction: a strong, high status, attractive exterior (lifestyle
and looks), fearless, and able to open up and share your vulnerable side with her (and
theoretically, only her). Women get weak in the knees for this. And it’s not even conscious in
them most of the time.
All that’s required is a certain level of emotional self-awareness and vulnerability in your
interactions.
And let me tell you, emotional connections are powerful. Far more powerful than any sort of
tactics or tricks you may learn in other “seduction” books. When you connect with women
emotionally, they really open up to you in ways that you can’t imagine, your interactions and
relationships with them become these rich and unique experiences that can never be
replicated, the sex is far better, and all mind games, flakes and ambivalence goes out the
window.
A lot of pick up and dating advice is what I call “attraction obsessed.” It has a constant
incessant harping on being the most attractive/alpha guy possible — usually by employing all
sorts of tricks, games, tactics, techniques, manipulation and other falsehoods. Attractionobsession
comes from a place of insecurity. It seeks validation. It’s needy behavior and
therefore self-sabotaging in the long-run.
It's not about attraction. She's attracted to 10 guys a day but doesn't sleep with any of them.
Women actually don't sleep with most men they're attracted to because they would feel slutty
or cheap.
Her feeling slutty or cheap isn't about a "Oh, I put out on a first date," thing. It's not about
number of dates, hours spent together, how many dinners you bought her.
Feeling slutty is about sleeping with a guy who doesn't care about her. If she doesn't trust you
or isn't 100% convinced that you really like her and care about her, then she's not going to do
it.And if she does, then she’ll regret it and feel dirty.
So how do you develop deep and lasting emotional connections with women, connections that
will blow your mind and heart away as well as hers too? Connections that will give you some of
the best nights and sex of your life?
Glad you asked.
Here’s the basic pattern, and you should recognize a lot of overlap here with Chapter 3:
- Becoming aware of your own emotions, motivations and life story.
- Taking the lead by sharing those emotions, motivations and life story first.
- Sharing first creates trust and encourages her to open up and share herself in return.
- Ideally, the more this goes on, the more personal the stories become and the deeper the
emotions in which you connect with.
For instance, take a simple conversation about music you two like. She likes Jay Z. You like Jay
Z. Instead of just saying, “I really like Jay Z,” you can expand and talk about WHY you like Jay
Z.
Instead of just, “I like Jay Z,” you could say, “I love Jay Z. He always reminds me of my brother.
My brother used to drive me to school for years, and he would blast Jay Z every morning.
Looking back it meant a lot to me, my brother taking care of me like that. My dad was always
too busy. So Jay Z always reminds me of that. Those moments of appreciation that you don’t
recognize until years later.”
Wow... that’s a little intense, right? That’s the idea. If you feel uncomfortable just reading that
and imagining yourself saying something like it, then that’s good. That’s vulnerability. And
ultimately, that’s what’s going to make you an attractive man who can emotionally connect
with women.
Things can go even deeper as well. For instance, it’s one thing to talk about jobs. Maybe she’s
a lawyer and came from a poor immigrant background. It may be obvious that she worked very
hard and is very ambitious. You could relate to that by sharing how when you were a teenager,
a couple of your best friends were injured in a car accident and how that affected you, scared
you straight, and helped you become grateful for every day you have, how you started taking
advantage of your time and potential and worked very hard to get where you are. Whatever it
is, open up about it. Challenge yourself to go one level deeper.
And the most important rule of emotional connection is to relate to feelings, not facts.
Seduction is about feelings, not facts. This is why you can often meet a woman who shares a
LOT in common with you — same home town, same occupation, same interests, lives on the
same street — and have no connection or chemistry whatsoever. But then you can meet a
woman who has lived an entirely different life from you, but if you can relate to the emotional
struggles and emotional realities that she’s gone through, you can connect deeply.
She may be a rich girl whose father died when she was eight and who was sent to boarding
school, and you may have had to work your way up from poverty in India and then move to the
USA, but emotionally, you can relate very deeply — the alienation from home, growing up with
no sense of family or support other than achievement, feeling isolated by your talent.
Everybody on this planet shares a handful of universal emotional realities: ambition, shame,
alienation, loneliness, achievement, regret, hardship, friendship, love, heartbreak. We’ve all
experienced it. The facts change, the feelings are the same. I don’t care how shallow or dumb
or weird or annoying she is, she has it somewhere in her. It’s your job to dig it out and connect
with it. That’s where the gold is. That’s where the real magic happens. Challenge yourself to
find it.Because once you do, you’ll never go back.
And the biggest misconception about generating a strong emotional connection is that it
obligates you to some sort of commitment. It doesn’t. Although it’s more likely to cause you
two to want to commit to one another, a relationship commitment is an intellectual construct,
emotional connection happens organically on an unconscious level.
Be careful though, some women will feel cheated if you get too close to them without following
through on any sort of commitment. Our culture has hammered it into women’s head that
emotion equals commitment equals happily-ever-after, and that’s just rarely the case. So make
sure when you connect with women on a deep level, they can handle it – that they’re
conscious enough to understand your expectations and that just because you feel a lot with
each other, you’re not necessarily obligated to one another.
Building and Breaking Habits
Your communication skills are a series of overlapping habits. You have habits of when and how
you make eye contact with people, how you speak, your voice inflections, what kinds of
questions you ask, whether you lead the conversation or follow, whether you’re curious about
others or self-centered, how often you smile, look away or laugh. The list goes on and on.
If you have trouble relating to people, particularly women, then chances are you’ve developed
communication habits that are unattractive and are not serving you well.
Some of these habits are simple to learn and fix, such as making more eye contact. Others are
more difficult to notice and harder to fix, for instance deferring to the opinion of others when
making an observation.
The specific habits that are attractive and unattractive will be covered extensively in the next
chapter. But for now, I want to wrap up this chapter by going over the process in which to build
and break these habits.
A lot of men get the wrong idea. They’ll read some dating advice saying something like, “touch
her on the arm when you smile at her.” Then they’ll go out and do it and it’ll feel very awkward
and stilted, so they’ll never do it again.
The reason it feels awkward and stilted is because they’ve never done it before. It’s not a habit
for them yet. In fact, NOT touching a woman when they smile is a habit, and they’re trying to
break it. Habits are hard to break. They take time.And you have to do them repeatedly.
The trick is to identify the good/bad habits you want to build or break and the focus on them
consciously until they’re second nature. This actually doesn’t take a long time. For simple
things such as eye contact or posture, it may only take a few weeks. For things such as
touching, or making statements instead of questions, it may be even shorter.
Either way, the more you implement the habits, the better your reactions from women will be,
therefore increasing your motivation to implement the habits further.
Basically what I’m saying here, is that everything described in the next chapter is not an
overnight fix, you have to go out and do it over and over again.
And just as with de-sensitizing yourself to your anxieties, you want to focus on one at a time.
Two at the most.
Another problem many men run into is that they learn that they need to make strong eye
contact, lean back on their back foot, touch on the approach, make observations about her
features, qualify her on her passions, smile when she smiles, and touch her when she laughs all
at the same time.
So they go out, and get completely jumbled up and don’t know what to focus on and are
unable to focus on all of the behaviors at the same time.
It often actually makes their interactions worse.
We won’t be doing that. In fact, I think a lot of the tiny habits listed above are overrated. I’ll be
presenting attractive social habits in more general terms so that 1) you have fewer things
clogging your brain and 2) there will still be room to express your personality and unique ticks.
You’ll also notice that many of these habits are directly correlated with overcoming fears and
anxieties as discussed in Chapters 10 and 11. For instance, developing the habit of touching a
woman when you make a joke relates directly to an anxiety many men feel about showing
sexual interest. The habit of smiling when you introduce yourself to somebody ties into the
anxiety of meeting new people.
Many of these behaviors are linked to your anxieties.And the interesting thing is that you can
resolve them from both sides: fixing your outer behaviors will help alleviate your internal
anxiety, and alleviating your internal anxiety will help fix up your outer behaviors.
As always, a lack of fear and attractive social behaviors are rooted in a comfort with making
yourself vulnerable, an honest expression of your desires, and ultimately, comes from a nonneedy
identity that is not invested in what others think.
Chapter 13: How to Be Charming
“Let us make a special effort to stop communicating with each other, so we can have some
conversation.”
- Mark Twain, Writer
S ometimes even if your intentions are in line and you’re expressing yourself openly, people
won’t always perceive you correctly. Communication is always up for interpretation, therefore
there’s always going to be a chance that you’re being misunderstood or people make incorrect
judgments about you.
For instance, you may ask a girl out for coffee. But perhaps she doesn’t hear you clearly, or
perhaps she’s not very adept at knowing when men are hitting on her, so she may not be
aware of your sexual interest.
Or maybe you compliment a girl on her dress. But for whatever reason, your tonality and facial
expression aren’t clear and she thinks you’re being sarcastic. Maybe she’s insecure and very
touchy about men complimenting her, so she responds negatively.
In the long run, misunderstandings and miscommunication is unavoidable. No matter how clear
and how charming you are there are always going to be women who misinterpret what you say
to them as well as your intentions. This is a fact of life and something you have to get used to.
But what we can control is how efficiently and openly we communicate by learning clear and
effective communication skills. The better our communication skills, the more clearly we can
express ourselves and show sexual interest. The more clearly we express ourselves and show
sexual interest, the more likely we’ll be able to connect with women in a sexual and emotional
way.
It’s sad but true. There are often situations where a woman will be sexually interested in a
man, but their failure to communicate their intentions to one another clearly will derail the
entire interaction. There’s no excuse to let this happen.
And as with all of the Three Fundamentals, you’ll find that clear communication will enhance
other areas of your life — your professional relationships, your family relationships, your
friendships, your networking abilities — just as much as it enhances your romantic relationships
and your ability to meet and attract women.
First Impressions
First impressions are crucial. Studies show that we base the majority of our perception of
people on the first few minutes we spend with them. This initial perception can extend and
influence our relationship to the person for weeks or even months.
If I look at all of the women I’ve been with, just about all of them (I’d estimate 90% or so), it felt
“on” within the first few minutes of the interaction. We clicked and that first impression of each
other led to dating and/or sex further down the line.
The biggest misconception about first impressions is being overly concerned with what to say
to a woman when you meet her. This is secondary, and hopefully by this point in the book, I
don’t have to explain why.
The exact words you actually say are far less important than your intentions and level of
anxiety.
90% of the time when I approach a new woman, I simply say, “Hi, I’m Mark.” I then follow it up
with, “You’re cute,” or some innocuous comment, like, “Do you know what’s good to order
here?”
You can ask a woman how her day is going, or say the most perceptive or witty thing to her in
the first minutes, but her first impression is largely going to be based on how you present
yourself (looks/lifestyle; Chapters 8 and 9), your level of anxiety (anxiety; Chapters 10 and 11),
and your ability to communicate clearly. What actually comes out of your mouth is going to be
forgotten or completely irrelevant within seconds.
With that in mind, here are guidelines for making a good first impression:
- Do NOT startle her or scare her when you approach her. This is possibly the only death knell
for approaching women. If you startle her or scare her when she first meets you, in my
experience, there is almost absolutely nothing you can do to recover. You’re immediately
labeled “creepy” and she will do anything possible to get out of the situation. Even if she’s
polite and talks for a minute, chances are she’s never going to open up and trust you.
Typical ways guys startle or scare women upon the approach are by approaching them from
behind (huge no-no), grabbing them violently, screaming at them, or saying something
offensive or weird.
- When in doubt on how to approach a woman, simply walk up and introduce yourself and
explain to her that you wanted to meet her. I know this sounds drab and boring. But remember,
it’s not about entertaining her; it’s about exuding confidence and genuine interest in her.
During the day, I often prep the introduction by saying something like, “Excuse me, this is kind
of random...” Also during the day, I usually tell them that I think they’re cute.
In my experience, the fancier and more creative guys try to get with their opening lines, the
more likely they are to a) say something weird and b) the more likely they are to come off
needy. Think about it, if you sit around for 10 minutes trying to think of what to say to a girl so
that she’ll like you, how is that ever confident?
She’ll sense this. In fact, it’s kind of amazing. Women really do seem to have a sixth sense. I’ve
noticed that the longer I hesitate and stare at a girl before I approach her, the more likely I am
to be rejected. The best approaches I ever do are when I don’t think about it and I
spontaneously just walk up and say hello.
- Don’t linger. If you linger and hover around her, it’s almost guaranteed to make the approach
feel awkward and forced. Imagine a straight line between you and her, and when you’re ready
to go, follow that straight line until you’re standing right in front of her. Don’t stand around and
kick the dirt at your feet trying to work up the nerve right next to her.
- Smile.Always smile. Don’t smile like “Holy shit, look at your tits,” smile. But smile as in you’re a
nice, friendly person smile. A comfortable smile. Lean back. Stand up tall. Speak loudly yet
clearly. Make strong eye contact. Introduce yourself and stick out your hand. Give a firm
handshake. This is called being a confident human being.
If you follow the guidelines above, around 70-80% of the women you approach should give you
either a Neutral or Receptive response, assuming you’re not in an extreme environment. If
you’ve handled your looks and lifestyle (Chapter 8), then expect even a higher percentage.
I’d say that about 80% of the women I approach with, “Hi, I’m Mark,” respond either neutrally or
warmly.And that’s regardless of where I am — nightclub, coffee shop, library, hotel bar, etc. It’s
where to go after the initial impression where things get tricky and where you’ll get most of
your rejections. Unless you’re approaching women in a very polarizing way (in which case
you’re welcoming rejection), you really should not be getting massive rejections early on.
If you are getting many rejections right on the initial approach, then it’s one of the following
three things:
1. You’re presenting yourself poorly — i.e., you dress poorly, bad looks, bad style, bad body
language. Review Chapters 8 and 9 again.
2. Your intentions are off. You’re approaching for the wrong reasons. The wrong reasons
include anything that is not, “She’s cute, I want to meet her.” That means, approaching for
statistics, approaching for "practice,” approaching to impress your friends. Approaching
because you want to live up to a bunch of crap you read on the internet. These are all the
WRONG reasons to approach. When you see a hot girl, you should be motivated by nothing
but your desire to be with her. That’s it. If you have trouble finding that motivation, refer back
to the section on sexual anxiety in Chapter 10.
3. You’re not following one of the guidelines above. You’re startling her. You’re trying too hard
to be clever or interesting. Or you’re doing some thing technically wrong (not looking her in the
eye, not smiling, etc.)
Like I said, if you have everything together, you should not be getting rejected often on the
opener. I’ve coached guys who still had some major flaws (lack of confidence, poor looks,
anxiety), but having them follow the guidelines above still got most of the women to at least
stop and talk to them for a second.
And really that’s all the opener is trying to do: stop them and get them to talk to you for a
second. It’s your conversation skills that get that second to turn into a minute and that minute
to turn into an hour.
Conversation Skills
Developing conversation skills is a deep topic, and for the sake of this book, I’m only going to
gloss over the most important aspects and the advice that’s easiest to implement.
If you’d like to pursue your conversational skills further, check out the Further Reading section.
The topics that we’ll cover in this section are:
- Using effective language
- Questions versus statements
- Creating endless conversation topics
- Storytelling
- Basics of emotional connection
Using Effective Language: This is the easiest “quick fix” that you can apply to your
communication skills. Using effective language means speaking what you mean with the
fewest words possible while still maintaining your meaning and intent.
Most people are guilty of this, but some more than others. This is where being a good writer
can actually help you become a good communicator. If you’re saying something in four
sentences that could be said in one, say it in one. If you are saying something in ten words that
can be said in four, say it in four.
In conversation and communication quality always wins out over quantity. We would all rather
have 30 seconds of AMAZING communication than 10 minutes of mediocre communication
saying the same thing.
It also means removing “um,” “uh,” “ah,” “like,” “you know,” and other fillers from your everyday
speaking.
Removing all of these 100% of the time is often impossible (I still drop an “um,” or “you know,”
occasionally), but the more of these you remove, the more clear and coherent your speaking
will be. Nothing screams a lack of sophistication like somebody who sprinkles “like” and “umm”
throughout his stories constantly.
Read the following two sentences out loud:
“So, um, I guess what I’m saying is like, that I never really felt at home when I lived, uh, out
there, you know, in California. The people, uh, just felt kind of like, superficial to me. And I, um,
didn’t like really like it a whole lot I guess.”
“I never really felt at home in California. The people felt kind of superficial to me. I didn’t really
like it.”
Don’t speak like a robot either. You can still use all of the inflections, tonality and pacing on the
second sentence without having to drop “um” and “like” all the time.
When you read it, you should be able to feel an immediate difference. The first one feels very
casual, lackadaisical, even lazy and uninterested. The second one feels serious, stern,
powerful, and clear.
Questions Versus Statements : Creating threads of conversation through statement is far more
powerful than questions. This is because it assumes rapport and makes conversations more
personally instantly.
For instance, if you’ve been talking to a woman at a bar for a few minutes, saying, “I love olives
in my drink. When I was a kid I used to eat them straight out of the jar,” is far more interesting
than, “Do you like olives in your drink?” and waiting for her response. In fact, that question is
just plain weird. But that statement is interesting, and what many women would consider
“cute.”
Instead of incessant questioning, you want to develop a skill called cold-reading. Cold-reading
is a skill where you’re able to intuitively “know” something about someone else without actually
knowing it. It’s like being a psychic without the cheesiness.
For our purposes, cold-reading is just a way of creating interesting statements rather than
asking questions for information. You don’t ask the question you want to know, but instead
you make a mild prediction.
Instead of asking her a question about herself, you guess the answer to your question and
then state it. Here are some examples:
“Where are you from?” translates to: “You look like a California girl.” “What do you do for
work?” translates to:“You seem to be a creative person. I bet your job is interesting.”
“How do you guys know each other?” translates to: “You guys look like you’ve been friends for
a long time.”
In each situation, the statement makes an educated guess and engages the woman far more
than any question will. Instead of asking her about herself, you’re telling her about herself. The
only thing people love more than talking about themselves is hearing about themselves. But
what if you’re wrong?
That’s the best part! A lot of guys worry about cold-reading because they’re afraid to state
something incorrect. This is where human nature works in our favor.
There’s no failing with cold-reading. With every cold-read, one of three things will happen:
1.You’ll be wrong, and she’ll correct you.
2.You’ll be wrong, and she’ll ask you what made you think that.
3.You’ll be right, and she’ll freak out at how perceptive you are.
In the first result, she’ll basically just answer the question you based your cold-read on and
forget that you were wrong.
In the second result, you’ll be wrong, but she’ll be so intrigued by your guess, that she’ll create
a deeper conversation thread about what you observed about her. Later in the chapter, we’ll
talk about the importance of creating the deepest threads possible.
In the third result, the few times you get the cold-read correct, she will most likely be surprised
at how perceptive you are about her. This will generate a tidal wave of rapport immediately
and impress her at the same time.
Here are examples of a cold-read situation with all three different responses:
Me:“You look a bit bookish.You must be a student around here.” Her:“No, I’m not.But I do love
to read, though.”
Me: “You look a bit bookish. You must be a student around here.” Her: “No. What made you
think that? Is it my glasses? I just got them.”
Me: “You look a bit bookish. You must be a student around here.” Her: “Yeah, I am! Wow, is it
that obvious?”
You should cold-read as much as possible. Any time you’re asking a question that requires a
factual answer; take a stab at the answer instead of asking.
One night, I met a girl from Chicago. I took a blind guess at which University she went to and
was right. She couldn’t get over “how perceptive” I was for a good five minutes. She asked me
how I knew and I told her I could tell she was on the intellectual side although I figured she
probably moved because the school was located in a bad part of the city. Everything was
dead-on despite being educated guesses. From that point on, she engaged me completely in
conversation and was more than excited to hang out with me again.
Besides that, creating conversations out of statements protects you from “blanking.” You
know when you are talking to a woman and all the sudden the conversation dies and you have
no idea what to say? You’re sitting there awkwardly and the more uncomfortable you feel, the
harder it is to come up with something. Eventually, you blurt out something boring like, “So…
where do you live?”
Using statements can prevent this a great deal. Instead of fishing for a new conversation
based on a generic question, you can simply comment about something or observe something.
Never underestimate the power of non sequiturs.
“I’m thinking about quitting drinking.” “A car almost hit me on the way here tonight.” “My
roommate eats peanut butter and mayonnaise sandwiches. It’s disgusting.” “I’ve always
wanted to visit Africa.” These will sometimes come across as random. But that’s because they
are – they’re whatever thoughts are popping into your head at the moment. It’s better to be
random and interesting than predictable and boring. Don’t be afraid to just blurt something out.
This works because unlike questions, statements require no investment from the other person.
You can say whatever you want and there’s no implicit expectation for her to generate
conversation as well.
Speaking in statements in this fashion – to generate spontaneous conversation – is important
in that it forces you to share yourself with her. When you simply ask a girl questions, you aren’t
giving any information about yourself, so it’s harder for her to trust you or build rapport. But if
you simply state a fact about yourself and then talk about it, you are now sharing yourself AND
giving her a chance to chime in with her input as well.
The amazing thing about speaking in statements is if you do it correctly, she will start asking
YOU questions. This may not seem like a big deal, but it actually reorients the entire
interaction. As I mentioned earlier, whoever is asking the questions is subcommunicating a
desire to learn more about the other, i.e., interest, i.e., they’re attracted to them. If she is
constantly seeking information from you, you now have the power to control the interaction –
you control the information and the conversation.
Endless Conversation Topics : In every topic of conversation, there are countless opportunities
to jump off onto other topics – there are countless word associations to be made.
For instance, let’s assume you’re talking to a woman and she says, “I never liked that
restaurant. I went there on my birthday last year, and I don’t remember anything past midnight.
I woke up on my friend’s kitchen floor.”
This is loaded with opportunities to take the conversation in new directions. You could relate
and talk about any of the following:
1. The restaurant she doesn’t like.
2. What you did on your last birthday.
3. The last time you got black out drunk.
4. A story relating waking up somewhere unusual. Any and all of these topics will be relevant
and interesting to the conversation.
If you don’t already do this, it’s a habit you need to ingrain in yourself
– just as the comedians ingrain off-the-wall word associations.
Here are a series of examples of statements that women may make. In them I have underlined
the “jump off” points. Think of them as intersections with which you can choose which
direction to move the conversation.As you read through these examples, try to come up with
a statement to relate to each jump off point. This will help teach you to be prepared to speak
about any topic on the spot.
1. “I go to Harvard right now. But I want to move back out west. The weather’s too cold up
here.”
2.“I’m here with my friends Steve and Carrie. They’ve been dating for six months, but they fight
like a married couple.”
3.“We work together downtown in the district. It’s all right, but I’m looking to change careers.”
4. “We were at this party last night. It was crazy. The cops ended up busting it and some
drunken kid got arrested.”
Try re-reading through these examples and at each underlined word or phrase, try to
immediately come up with a thought or response about it. For example, I see Harvard, and I
think of how one time I visited there and their campus looks like a palace. I also think of friends
of mine who went to Harvard. These are both legitimate places to take the conversation.
Once you become competent at this, you’ll notice that this is the way in which EVERY
conversation flows. Conversations only end when one person says something to which the
other person has no jump off points. This is what happens when a conversation “dies.” If you
teach yourself to recognize jump off points and take advantage of them as soon as possible,
you’ll be able to sustain a conversation with almost anybody indefinitely.
Combining this skill with the ability to cold-read and create conversational threads out of thin
air by making statements, and you will literally develop the skill to begin and control any
conversation with anybody for any length of time.
This skill is imperative to your success with women.
EVERYTHING you do to attract and interest women lies on the foundation of strong
conversational skills. Teaching a shy and reserved guy strong conversational ability will
immediately translate to improved results.
Storytelling : Human beings, by default, are enrapt by stories, or more specifically, a story-arc.
Politicians use them to campaign, teachers use them to explain important concepts,
comedians use them to make us laugh, and we use them constantly in our day-to-day
interactions.
But what you probably didn’t notice is that the best communicators you know are fantastic
story-tellers.
Have you ever had a friend who would start telling you about something and it just seemed to
go nowhere? Like, they’d start telling you about their trip to Chicago and after describing the
hotel and maybe mentioning the concierge, the story just went nowhere?
Or have you ever known someone who consistently makes jokes that don’t completely make
sense, or most people don’t ever seem to “get it?”
Or maybe you’re one of these people… Do people ever stop paying attention to you mid-
story? Or do you have trouble making others laugh (intentionally, that is)?
Chances are, these people (or you), aren’t following a strong story arc. For whatever reason,
humans have evolved to be absolutely fascinated when information is communicated in a
certain pattern. This is true of just about any culture and background.
There are three main points of a story arc:
Set Up: The set up is exactly what it says, you’re setting the scene or the context for what
you’re about to say. It’s the foundation of what’s about to be told, and if you don’t set up
properly, then your stories, jokes and ideas will always seem to be random. People will
consistently comment that you’re really random, weird or “off the wall.”
Content/Conflict: After setting up what you’re going to talk about, you get into the actual
content. This can also be the “conflict” in your story. Whatever it is, it’s something that causes
tension and expectancy. The content of your story needs to be intriguing and hook people into
wanting to know what will happen next. If you don’t build much tension with the content of
your stories, you will find people losing interest or get the feeling like you ramble on a lot.
Resolution: The resolution releases the tension from the conflict or content. Resolutions can
come in forms of punchlines (for jokes), conclusions (for ideas), or just closure for a generic
story. People who don’t resolve their stories and ideas well will often get blank stares when
they’re finished speaking, or people asking them, “Yeah, and…?” not realizing that the story is
finished.
When I was in college, my first roommate had a funny habit whenever he got drunk. He’d
basically turn into a narcoleptic — he’d spontaneously fall asleep in strange places and at
random moments. (Set up)
Well, literally the first night I knew this guy, he and I go out to some orientation party. We meet a
couple girls and go back to their dorm with them. He and I are totally drunk and I notice he’s
kind of stopped talking to his girl and is dozing off in the corner. Kind of weird, but it was like
3AM, so whatever. Suddenly, he says he’s going to go and gets up and leaves. I think nothing
of it until I go home, wake up the next morning and he’s still not back. Hours pass and I start
getting worried. (Content/Conflict)
It turns out that the guy went out into the hallway lobby, laid down on the floor and slept there
the whole night. But not only that, he left his jacket in the girl’s room. So at like 9 in the morning
he had to sneak back in, wake her up and take his jacket back. It was pretty hilarious at the
time. But yeah, that was my college roommate. (Resolution)
Often adding a line like, “Yeah, that was my college roommate,” is good because it indicates
that the story is finished and that you’re finished speaking.
I knew I wasn’t meant for the 9 to 5 world almost immediately. Out of college, I took a nice job at
a prestigious bank in downtown Boston. (Setup)
I hated it from day one. In fact, I remember thinking about three hours into the first day, “I wonder
how long I have to work here before I can leave?” (Conflict/Content)
My next thought was, “This is probably a bad sign.” (Resolution)
Notice that I allude to the conclusion in the beginning of my story. This is called
“foreshadowing” and often helps people follow along. Also notice that it really doesn’t matter
how long or short each component of the story is as long as you convey the correct
information.
When most people talk about a crazy city, I don’t think they’ve ever been to South America. I
lived down there for a few months last Spring and you see things every week that are just
beyond our reality here. (Setup)
Like one night, we hopped in a cab to go to another nightclub. It was a Tuesday at about 4am.
The taxi driver promptly turns around and asks us if we’d like to try some of his cocaine. We
politely refuse. So the cabbie says in Spanish, “Fine, more for me.” He then proceeds to do
lines of coke while driving 50mph with his knees. (Content/Conflict)
We all thought we were going to die that night. (Resolution)
All true stories by the way…
In the last section, we talked about “jump off points” in conversation and how that’s how we
learn to relate to one another in conversation. The examples showed jump off points in
individual sentences.
Well, in real life, people speak in more than sentences; they speak to each other in stories. So
you’ll want to develop the ability to formulate entire stories around jump off points, as well as
notice jump off points within entire stories.
This is actually much easier than it sounds, and you probably do it naturally with your friends
and family in a lot of situations. The idea is to just do it consistently and naturally and with
ANYBODY, including attractive women.
Relating and Connecting: The final goal of a successful conversation is to actually make a
personal connection with the woman you’re talking to.
When you are talking to a woman, there are only two real subjects of conversation: her and
you. Everything you speak about should be, in some way, revealing your identity to her or her
identity to you.
This uncovering of identity is what creates the sense of a “connection”. The greater the
connection you create, the more she’ll want to spend more time with you and vice-versa.
Making a connection requires three steps: being open about yourself; getting her to be open
about herself;relating to each other’s experiences.
Most men have trouble talking about themselves, period. The only times they usually feel
comfortable talking about themselves is with their mothers or once they’ve known somebody
for a few years.As a rule, we tend to be fairly shut off from those around us.
Men feel more comfortable talking about things OUTSIDE of themselves: sports, politics, cars,
movies, girls, etc. Women on the other hand are only engaged when they ARE talking about
themselves (or each other). This is why they’re constantly gossiping, creating drama or people
watching.
To connect with a woman, you NEED to learn to communicate this way. Sorry, but talking
about politics won’t create a unique connection with a woman (unless she’s extremely
passionate about it).
So what do you talk about? How do you talk about yourself openly? When I tell guys “talk
about yourself more. Open up.” A lot of them go out and say, “I’m from New York. I like baseball.
I’m 27.” It’s good that they’re sharing themselves now, but that’s a bit shallow.
Take out a sheet of paper and write down three things for each of the following:
• Your passions and favorite things to do.
• Your dreams, ambitions, life goals.
• The best/worst things that have happened to you.
• Your childhood, family life, and upbringing.
Now, go back to each item you wrote down and talk about it to yourself for one minute. Try to
be as detailed and honest as possible. It’s not as easy as it sounds. Even when you’re alone
sometimes talking about these subjects makes you a little uneasy.
Most men feel a bit vulnerable when talking about these topics, especially to women. That’s
the point.
Be willing to share any part of yourself to anyone at any time and on any level. You have
nothing to lose by sharing yourself. At the worst, she’ll reject you and – well, she’s going to
reject you if all you do is talk about sports and your job anyway, so what’s the problem?
What you’ll actually find is when you share something deeper and personal about yourself, it
will be genuine and she’ll immediately respond to that by being genuine herself.
Ideally, sharing these aspects of yourself will encourage her to share them in herself. You want
to get her to talk about her passions, her ambitions, her best experiences and her most
vulnerable experiences. These are the topics that define us as humans and make us unique –
i.e., different from the last 20 guys who talked to her.
These are the topics of conversation that will make you stand out. Why? Because she knows
you. Not your favorite sports team. Not the party you went to last week… but you.
And when she knows you and remembers you, she’ll make sure to pick up the phone when you
call and meet up with you again.
In conclusion : When it comes to conversations, there’s a lot to cover. Reading this last section
may have been overwhelming for you. If so, just remember: break it up into little chunks,
practice one thing at a time.
If conversation is a particular issue for you, and you’d like help structuring it and working on it,
then check out some of the resources in the Further Reading section at the end of the book.
But now that we’ve covered how to hold a dynamic and interesting conversation, let’s talk
about how to spice it up. Let’s talk about humor...
Humor
There’s an old saying, if you can make a woman laugh then you can get her to laugh right into
bed. Now, although humor is not a cure-all for anybody’s dating problems, it’s definitely
important.
The reason is that a strong sense of humor conveys all of the right traits to a woman.A man
who can laugh easily at the world and who isn’t afraid to laugh at the world conveys a high
level of confidence. He also makes women feel good around him. A man who is very serious
and very unable to laugh at himself or the world, conveys that he is heavily invested in the
perceptions of the world around him and is therefore unconfident.
Your specific type of sense of humor isn’t so important as much as that you have it. Obviously,
different women will respond strongly to different types of humor, but this is less a function of
your ability to tell jokes and more of demographics. Focus on what you find funny to you
personally, and don’t be afraid to share that with the women you meet. If they laugh, then
great! If they don’t, then chances are it won’t go anywhere.
At its core, humor is the art of drawing connections between two seemingly unrelated ideas or
objects. There are a number of ways to do this, but at its core, humor is a creative activity, and
therefore will greatly be tied to your ability to uninhibitedly express yourself. Sometimes your
jokes will fall flat, particularly when you’re starting out. That’s OK. Don’t laugh at yourself. Don’t
make fun of yourself. Don’t try to explain the joke. The worst thing you can do when you make
a joke that nobody laughs at is to draw more attention to yourself. Just act like nothing
happened and move on.
In this section, I’ll give a brief overview of a few types of humor: misdirection, exaggeration,
sarcasm, wordplay and roleplaying.
Misdirection : One of the most common and easiest forms of humor is misdirection.
Misdirection occurs when you begin to say something or tell a story which leads the listener to
believe you’re making one point, and then out of nowhere you say something completely
different. For instance, here’s a famous line by Steve Martin:
“You know that look women get when they want to have sex? ... Yeah, me neither.”
The line sets you up to believe that he’s going to tell you a story about the time a woman gave
him a look like she wanted to have sex with him. But he misdirects you and ends up making a
joke about his own sexual inexperience. Here’s another one from Jimmy Fallon:
“There’s a new book out called ‘Why Women Have Sex’ that says there are 237 reasons why
women have sex. And folks, David Letterman knows the top 10.”
Again, he sets up the joke by telling you about a new book out relating to why women have
sex. But he then takes the idea of of there being 237 reasons why women have sex and
relating it to David Letterman’s famous “Top 10” segments on his show and the fact that
Letterman sleeps with his interns. It’s the connection of these two seemingly unrelated topics
that makes it funny.
Exaggeration : Exaggeration is another mainstay of humor and something that everyone
should be able to use. Exaggeration is when you take a quality about something, and blow it
completely out of proportion, often in a creative or interesting way. For instance:
“She’s a nice woman though, nicest three acres of flesh I’ve ever met.”
Obviously, no woman actually has three acres worth of flesh.But the exaggeration of her being
fat is what causes this line to be funny. There’s also a subtle misdirection in the line (going
form “she’s nice” to “she’s fat”).
Typically, the more creative and extreme you are in describing your exaggeration, the funnier it
will be. For instance, notice the difference in how funny the following two lines are:
“She was as ugly as a dog.”
“I’ve seen more attractive things in the bottom of an airport urinal.”
Notice the second one is far more extreme and creative. The completely unrelated ideas of an
airport urinal and a girl’s face (I’m laughing just typing this) is what creates the greater degree
of humor.
In humor, the more specific and odd the details, typically the more funny a joke is.
Teasing and Sarcasm : Whereas misdirection and exaggeration are funny to just about
anybody, you’ll run into a minority of women who don’t find teasing or sarcasm funny. Teasing
and sarcasm can also vary in degrees of appropriateness, especially depending on where you
are. If you’re at a funeral, it’s probably not a good idea to make sarcastic comments about the
deceased’s family.
Teasing is when you make humorous comments that are derogatory about someone.
Generally, teasing is done in good humor and with good intentions. Teasing with bad intentions
becomes insulting and is not welcome by most people.
Teasing is supposed to be fun. The ideal tease will create a mixture of emotions in a girl:
defensiveness yet happiness. The ideal reaction is when a girl will say, “Oh my god, I can’t
believe you said that,” but will be laughing at the same time and smiling. Here are a couple
examples of teases:
(To a girl wearing bright red shoes)
“Are you going to click your heels to go home later?”
(To a girl sitting by herself in the corner looking bored) “So who put you in timeout?”
(To a girl waving a dollar bill at the bartender to get his attention) “Is that how you always get
men to pay attention to you?”
Be careful with teases, especially to women you don’t know. I said the last one to a woman I
didn’t know and got slapped. Then again, I still slept with her, but when you tease frequently
and freely, be prepared for a wide range of emotional responses. Teasing polarizes, often hard
and quickly. Therefore it’s a good tactic, but not always exactly pleasant.
Sometimes girls will genuinely be offended or sensitive to teasing and not react well. I’d say
maybe 1/3 of the women I meet do not react well to teasing or a good-natured ribbing. Make a
point to spot these women and let the teasing go. Generally women who don’t enjoy being
teased really appreciate genuine compliments, so I switch it up.
Sarcasm is an even darker form of humor than teasing. Sarcasm works on even fewer women,
but the women who appreciate it REALLY appreciate it. Chances are a lot of you reading this
don’t have a very sarcastic sense of humor. That’s fine. You can just live a sexless and lonely
life forever.
(That was sarcasm if you missed it.)
Seriously, sarcasm isn’t for everybody. Sarcasm is when you make an extreme statement
that’s completely opposite of what you actually mean. You often say it with complete
seriousness and without smiling.
A lot of women won’t get sarcastic humor. They’ll think you’re being serious or they’ll get
confused. Others don’t enjoy it very much. But I will say, in my experience, when a woman loves
sarcasm, she LOVES sarcasm.
Years ago, I was out with a girl at a bar. We had been flirting all night and she had a very
sarcastic sense of humor. At one point she looked at my drink and said, “You drink slow, I’ve
already finished my drink!"
Ireplied with a totally straight face,“Not all of us hate ourselves as much as you do.”
She erupted with laughter for a good 30 seconds, while simultaneously saying, “Oh my god, I
can’t believe you just said that to me.” Needless to say, it was on from there and we went
home together.
The Role of Swearing : Swearing and dirty language has an interesting role in humor. Many
types of humor, such as sarcasm and exaggeration require a certain level of edginess to pack
a powerful punch.
Using dirty language or swear words is kind of a cheap and easy way to make whatever you
say more extreme. For instance, adding the word “fucking” into just about any humorous
statement will make it pack a little more of a punch.
At the same time, using swear words is kind of a short-cut, and if you use them too often,
they’ll get old quickly and sound try-hard. Dropping a well-timed F-bomb can make a funny joke
even funnier. But dropping an F-bomb into everything you say just makes you look
unsophisticated.
Generally, the older you are, the more I recommend avoiding dirty language. Use it sparingly
and only use it when you have a specific reason to. The more you use it, the more attentionseeking
and negative you will make yourself appear, both of which are unattractive traits.
Wordplay and Puns : Wordplay is similar to misdirection in that the listener expects one type of
meaning and gets another, but wordplay practices misdirection by using words that have
various meanings.
A few examples:
“Hurry, a passenger is ill. We need to get to a hospital.” “What is it?”
“It’s a building with lots of doctors. But we don’t have time for that.”
Or:
“Surely, you can’t be serious!”
“I am serious. And please, don’t call me Shirley.”
I would say that puns and wordplay are even a rarer form of appreciated humor than sarcasm.
Puns and wordplay also tend to be very intellectual. You’ll find few women who appreciate
them.And chances are even fewer of you reading this like to say them.But again, when you do
find a woman who appreciates them, in my experience she REALLY appreciates them.
Roleplaying and Games : Games and roleplaying are quick and easy ways to inject fun into any
interaction with a woman. They’re playful. And they open up plenty of opportunities for other
types of humor when you use them.
Games can be anything from basic physical games (hand slaps, thumb wars, etc.) to word
games (five questions game, fuck/marry/kill, etc.). For instance, fuck/marry/kill is easy. You point
to three random people in the room and you say, “OK, out of those three people, who would
you fuck, who would marry and who would you kill, and why?” This game can lead to quite of
bit of interesting conversation based on people-watching.
Roleplaying can be just as energizing and fun. Roleplaying basically involves giving the woman
you’re talking to a fake role, and then playing around with that role. Some of my favorite
roleplaying involves marriage/divorce roleplaying.
For instance, when I first meet a girl, let’s say within 30 seconds she says something I don’t like.
I’ll say, “That’s it, we’re getting divorced.” It’s funny because I just met her, but you can actually
milk a lot of fun out of something simple like this — i.e., “You keep the kids, I’m moving to
Europe.” “By the way, your music sucks, and I never liked your casseroles either.”
If you find yourself having a lot of trouble with humor, I recommend watching a lot of stand up
comedians. Some of my favorites are Louis CK, George Carlin, Bill Maher, Bill Hicks, and Chris
Rock. Pay attention to their delivery, their timing, their facial expressions. These things can’t be
taught in a book, so pay attention to them. Pick a few of your favorite comics and watch their
stand up routines multiple times to get a real sense of how they tell a story and how they nail a
punchline.
Also, beware of falling into the trap of self-deprecating humor. A lot of men, particularly
unconfident men who are highly invested in other people’s reactions around them, will make
fun of themselves and put themselves down in order to get a laugh.
Although this may make women laugh, in excess, it’s an unconfident behavior because you’re
sacrificing your own self-perception for the sake of others’ amusement. Therefore, it’s
ultimately unattractive. Guys with a good sense of humor who habitually use it on themselves, I
recommend turning those same jokes and thoughts onto the women you’re talking to. Instead
of making fun of yourself, make fun of the girl you’re talking to. It may feel uncomfortable at
first, but you’ll be surprised at how it will blow your interactions wide open and infuse more
sexuality and playfulness into them.
Humor is not a cure-all for your problems with attracting and seducing women (if there were a
cure-all, it’d be physicality; Chapter 15). Some naturally funny men overly rely on their ability to
make a girl laugh and actually overdo it. Instead of being attractive and strong men, they
become entertainers constantly seeking attention and validation. The worst part about this
habit is that it all happens while making the woman laugh and making her enjoy your company.
So a lot of men get confused and actually think that they’re seducing her. She’s smiling. She’s
laughing.She likes me. I must be seducing her,right?
Sadly, no. Humor is only useful if used in conjunction with leading her in a dominant manner and
pushing things physically with her. Ultimately, you aren’t ever really attracting a woman unless
you’re connecting with her physically and emotionally.And although humor is a very useful tool
to HELP you do that, it doesn’t actually do it for you.
Chapter 14: The Dating Process
“I don’t have a girlfriend. I just know a lady who would get really angry if she heard me say that.”
- Mitch Hedberg, Comedian
L ike it or not, the dating process follows a somewhat rigid process. Boy meets girl, asks girl on
date, corresponds with girl, sets up date with girl, corresponds with girl, sets up second date
with girl, repeat until eventually you bring girl home with you, and at some point you decide if
you’re exclusive, non-exclusive, a casual couple, fuck buddies, soul-mates, or never want to see
each other ever again.
There are exceptions to this process, and the process can be sped up to a degree, but more or
less, there’s a courtship process that we must follow.
Our culture has silently defined a procedure for these things, and any man who wishes to be
successful with women needs to be aware of the procedure.
The process almost always involves the following: trading of contact details along with
following up, dates, either bringing her home or going home with her, having sex, and then
figuring out what kind of relationship (if any) will result. In certain instances, the contact details
and date can be forgone and you can bring her home (or go home with her) the day/night you
meet her. But these cases are rare, usually involve meeting a woman in a party or night club
situation and we won’t get into a whole lot of depth about it.
Phone Numbers
There’s a minor obsession in men’s dating advice about phone numbers, correspondence and
so-called “text game” or “flake prevention.”
so-called “text game” or “flake prevention.”
Flaking is a term used to describe a woman who gives you her phone number, says she wants
to see you again and then either never responds or returns your call, or never shows up on a
date. Flakes can simply be women who never respond to you, or women who respond but keep
sidestepping meeting up with you.
Obsessing about flakes and how to win them over is an easy trap to fall into. But in my opinion,
this is treating the symptom, not the illness.
The way to prevent flakes is to meet and attract women who are so interested in you that
they would never consider flaking.
Problem solved.
In my experience, 99% of the so-called flake prevention strategies guys implement — calling at
certain times, baiting with open-ended texts, pretending to send a text to the “wrong person,”
— these will rarely convince a girl who was never attracted to you to suddenly become
attracted to you.And even if by some chance they do convince her to meet up with you, you’re
now on a date with a woman who has no genuine interest being there with you.
Similarly, men spend way too much time obsessing over unimportant details like how many
times to text each day, how soon to call her, when to ask her out, etc. Setting rigid rules such
as “Wait three days to ask her out” or “Never text her twice in a row,” greatly limits you and will
hinder the unique connection you spent your time developing with the woman.And by the way,
it’s that connection that’s going to get her out to see you again, not the clever text you spent
45 minutes coming up with.
But with that said, here is my version of “The Rules” to calling and texting women:
- Only ask a woman for her phone number if she seems genuinely attracted and interested in
you. Only ask for her number if you can see yourself wanting to hang out with her again or
having time to hang out with her again. If you meet a girl who is in town for a bachelorette
party for three days, is drunk, and you have a serious meeting at work in two days, don’t
bother. If you’re concerned that you don’t know how to tell if she’s attracted to you or not,
there’s a section later in this chapter that covers signals women give you.
- When you ask her for her phone number, don’t come up with a fancy line or make up a
reason. Just ask her for it. If you’re attracted to her, you shouldn’t be afraid to hide it (you’re a
confident, dominant man, remember?). If she’s attracted to you, she’ll be more than excited to
give it to you. Most women will always give you their number when you ask. Even if they don’t
like you or have no intention of ever seeing you again, they’ll give it to you. It’s simply far easier
for them to ignore calls from guys they don’t like than to reject every guy to their face.
- Flakes happen to everybody. Get used to it. There are simply too many things going on in
most attractive women’s lives to figure out why each one flakes. It could be because her exboyfriend
started calling her again. It could be because she met her soul mate the day after
she met you. It could be because she got in a freak accident and is in the hospital. It could be
because she got sick and was bedridden. Sometimes women just don’t feel like dating for a
while. Sometimes they don’t remember you well because they were drunk when they met you.
Sometimes they lose their phone. Sometimes they just change their mind the next day. And
sometimes they just don’t care enough.
There are a million legitimate reasons women can flake other than then not being attracted to
you. Trying to figure out which ones are flaking for legitimate reasons and which ones are not
is more or less an impossible task. You’re better off just letting it go and moving on. In the end,
it comes down to the fact that if she likes you enough, she’ll find a way to make it happen. If
she’s not finding a way to make it happen, then she probably doesn’t like you as much as you
thought she did.
Think of it this way. If Brad Pitt texted her asking her out, do you think she could suddenly clear
her busy work schedule and move her weekend plans back? I think so. If she’s not doing that
for you, then she’s just not that interested.Sorry Charlie.
- My policy with flakes is “Three strikes you’re out.” If a woman
flakes once, I’ll try her a second time. If she doesn’t respond the second time, I may or may not
give it a third shot, but typically if I do, I don’t put much effort into the third attempt. Often I will
only try a woman once or twice. If there’s still nothing after the third attempt, I move on.
A lot of women will give you excuses why they can’t meet up, cancel dates, push dates back,
or simply stop responding. Sometimes they have legitimate reasons. Sometimes they’re
making excuses. This is why at the first reason they give, I always give them the benefit of the
doubt and try again. The second time, if I’m particularly interested in them and/or I think they
genuinely have had two legitimate excuses, I will try them one more time. Often I will even tell
them, “OK, last chance though.” After the third try, I just let them go. It’s not worth the time or
effort at that point.
- I always text within 24 hours of getting her number. I send a simple text: “Hey Sara, it was
nice meeting you.” That’s it. Most girls who are interested in you will respond somewhat
quickly. The ones who do not respond to this will usually flake on you.
- From there, I usually wait another day or so and start a text conversation. I like to reference a
conversation we had when we met in this text to try and keep some continuity. The goal here
is nothing special, just trying to get a little bit of back and forth going. It’s been over 24 hours
and I’m seeing how warm the lead still is. Typically, if I can get a text conversation going here,
then she’s pretty likely to go on a date with me. If her responses are few and far between, then
she’s likely a flake.
Don’t get fancy and try to re-invent the wheel here. Don’t get cute or try to win her over if she’s
not responding very much. Your leg work was put in when you met her, now you’re stuck with
what you earned. I’ve found that the cuter or harder you try to win girls over by text, the bigger
chance you have of looking unconfident and desperate and losing them.
Joke and tease her if she’s being responsive. If she’s not, stick to trying to get her out ASAP.
- Depending how the text conversation goes, I’ll either ask her out right then and there, or I’ll
wait another day or two depending on my schedule. It used to be expected that you call
women, but texting has quickly overtaken phone calls. Back in 2005 when I started this stuff, I
called every number I got. Now I almost never call a girl unless she specifically asks that I call
her. I would say in the last year, over 90% of my dates have been set up through texting.
- I have to say this again. Don’t get fancy or cute in your texts. Texting is, in general, an awful
medium for communication. Often if you try to get too sarcastic or witty in your texts, they can
be easily misinterpreted or come off with a completely different intention than you originally
had. And remember, everything comes back to intention. So clear, blunt language. I tell guys
that I only use texting to organize when she and I are going to see each other next. Literally,
that’s what 90% of my texts consist of, things like, “Hey, what are you doing Thursday night?”
or “I’m busy this weekend, but I want to see you again.”
My text conversations are boring. Just to give you an example of a typical text conversation,
I’ve posted below a transcript of the texting I did with the last girl I went out on a date with.
Some background first, this was a girl I met in a nightclub at about 1AM and spent no more
than 60-90 minutes with. There was light kissing, but mostly just talking and dancing. No
drinking (this is a biggie actually).And before she went home I mentioned that I’d like to see her
the next day.She said sure.
Me: Hey Mary, it was nice meeting you tonight.
Her:You too! :)
Me (next day): Hey, you said you work until 4PM,right? Her:Yes, do you still want to meet?
Me:Yeah. How about 7:30?
Her: Can we do 8?
Me:Sure. In the city center?
Her:Yes, in front of the X restaurant. Do you know where it is? Me:Yea, see you there.
Her:See you soon. :)
That’s it. I’d say 75% of my text correspondence looks like that.
But just to show you the other extreme, here’s a more unusual text transcript I had with a girl in
England a few months ago. This is about as “gamey” as I ever get.
Me: Hey Natalie, it was nice meeting you tonight.
Her: Hey, I have your phone number now. ;)
Me: Good, talk to you soon.
Me (next day): Hey Natalie, how was the rest of your night? Her: Great. We were tired and
went back a bit early though. Me: Good. Are you free tomorrow evening? Let’s meet up for a
drink.
Her: OK. When did you have in mind?
Me: How about 8 at X, do you know it?
Her:Yes I do. 8 it is. I’ll text you tomorrow. Good night. Me: Good night.
Her (next day): Hey, I’m overloaded at work and may not be able to meet you tonight. Sorry. I
hope you enjoy England.
Me: Come on Natalie. When you’re old and grey are you going to wish you worked more, or wish
you went on more dates with American boys?
Her: Haha! Very true. Let me see what I can do.
Her (later): OK, I finished early. I can meet you. :)
Notice how the only bit of “game” I threw at her was when she showed hesitance to meet up.
The only reason I did this is because I knew I was going to lose her if I didn’t amp things up,
show my desire for her again and polarize things a bit to prevent the flake. I did that. And it
worked.
Or did it?
Natalie never showed up. She called me at about 7:40PM and explained to me that although
she liked me a lot that because I was leaving England in a few days she couldn’t justify coming
on a date with me. It was clear she felt bad about it, but her values were clear.
I respected that decision and told her that that’s fine; that she’s a beautiful girl and that she
deserves a great guy who will stick around.And I meant it.
And unfortunately, this has consistently been my experience.A flake is a flake. No matter what
you text.Even if you can create a temporary illusion that she wants to meet up with you. When
it comes down to her spending the time to get ready and come out and meet you, there has to
be that initial attraction and connection from when you met. I’ve tried every kind of “text game”
and line in the book, and ultimately it always comes back to this: how well did you game her
when you met her.Because things always revert back to that level.
If anything, being cute and trying to impress will only hurt you, as it will come across as needy
and unattractive. One of the quickest ways to lose a girl is by texting her stuff that’s way too
try-hard.
When in doubt, be plain and to-the-point.
This often disappoints some guys. They get really excited about sending fancy or brilliant texts
that magically change a girl’s mind on a dime. Don’t bother. Short of lying or manipulation, it
almost never works.
You’re not going to be texting Shakespearean Sonnets to her. Get her to agree to meet up as
soon as possible and then do all of the heavy lifting in person, where you can interact
physically, where she can see your intentions and your non-neediness, and where you’re not
limited to 120 characters at a time or whatever.
- When it comes time to meet for the date, don’t make a big deal out of whether she’s late or
not. Most women are late. She’s not “testing” you. She’s probably just a disorganized woman
who got nervous and spent an extra 20 minutes in front of the mirror for you. Traffic happens a
lot.And some girls are terrible drivers and get lost. I usually give women 10-20 minutes leeway
and then if I haven’t heard from them by then with an explanation of why they’re late or when
they’re coming, then I go. If she’s apologetic about it, then follow the “Three Strikes You’re
Out” rule. If she’s not, then I drop her.
That’s it.
(No,really, that’s all.)
The Perfect Date
Despite how nervous you get before them, dates are perhaps the most straightforward part of
this entire process. Go to the right venues, go at the right times, avoid the obvious pitfalls, and
you should be in the clear. The guidelines in this section are straightforward.
When to Go on Dates: Don’t do lunch dates, and never make an afternoon date the first date if
possible. Just don’t do it. For whatever reason, nothing says, “let’s just be friends” more than
having lunch together.
Save dates for the nighttime. It builds a greater sense of expectation. There’s more flexibility to
spend more time together. It’s more of a commitment.And it leaves the option open for you or
her sleeping over.
So the next issue is, which night should you go on a date?
Not all nights are made the same. For instance, most attractive women are always busy on the
weekends and have other plans — so getting her out on a Friday is a big commitment and less
likely. On the other hand, a Monday night is most likely going to have her needing to get up
early the next morning or being stressed out, so if things go well, you’re more likely to have
things cut short.As a guideline, asking a woman out on each day of the week go from best to
worst as follows:
1. Thursday
2. Wednesday
3.Sunday
4. Tuesday
5. Monday
6. Friday
7.Saturday
As far as when to go, it’s going to depend a lot on what you’re doing. But you want to allow
yourself time for at least three one-hour activities (more on that later). So anywhere between
6PM to 9PM. Later than that, and you limit your time together. Earlier than that, and you get a
day-time vibe and the date will usually run out of steam before she has to go home. You want
to time the date, so that you are peaking together at around 10PM or 11PM and she has the,“I
need to go home, but I don’t want to yet,” feeling.
Where to Go: Absolutely NO movie dates for first or second dates. Movie dates are terrible.
You don’t get to talk, you sit awkwardly next to each other, and it’s impossible to touch her
without being awkward (importance of this will be delved into next chapter).
Avoid dinner dates if at all possible. They’re cliché. They’re impersonal. Once again, it’s almost
impossible to touch sexually. And believe it or not, a lot of women are self-conscious about
eating in front of you, food selection, etc. Also, you can avoid the awkward “who pays?”
situation — which we’ll talk about in the next section.
Good date locations are locations that are active, participatory, and allow for touching and
flirting. Alcohol can be helpful as well. Some good examples include: comedy clubs, dance
classes, museum exhibits, walks in interesting places (plazas, parks, etc.), concerts, etc.
A lot of places to go will depend on your town. I recommend using Yelp.com to find interesting
places around you. For instance, there used to be a bowling alley/night club venue near my old
apartment in Boston. It was a lot of fun. You could bowl together (participatory, active, allows
flirting) as well as have waitresses bring you drinks.
Bars and night clubs are fine if you both are into those kinds of venues… just make sure that if
you go, you end up there alone.A date with friends is not a date. This will often happen if she
suggests a bar to go: “Oh, we can meet my friend Cindy there…” Chances are if she wants to
hang out with her friend with you, then it’s no longer a date.
Finally, you should find venues and activities that are close to either your place or her place.
What I recommend doing, is researching and finding at least 4-6 good date venues or activities
that are within a short drive of your house or apartment. Even better is if you can find a few
places that are within walking distance. On top of that, you’ll want to know of good and
popular places to go all over town to account for women who may live far from you. There will
be times where logistics will dictate that you’ll have to drive out to see her, rather than the
other way around. This is fine, but you’ll still often be expected to come up with ideas on where
to go or what to do, so there’s no excuse for not being prepared.
The logic is simple: the closer the venues are to your place or hers, the easier it will be to end
up at your place or hers at the end of the night.
Once you’ve researched and found 4-6 venues and activities near your place that you enjoy
doing, that are good date activities and are easily accessible, it’s time to start putting them
together. The ideal amount of places/activities per date is three.
This may sound weird to you, but this is key. Most men do dinner, drinks and then sit at the
table for another hour chatting away. On our dates, we are DOING things… lots of things.
We’re going bowling, having drinks, dancing, checking out statues in the park and carriage
riding… all in three hours.
There’s something strange in human psychology. Our level of intimacy with one another
doesn’t come from how much we talk about, as much as it comes from the experiences we
share. These dates are designed to create as much mutual experience as possible in the least
amount of time as possible. Here are some examples of solid dates:
Meet for coffee -> get ice cream down the street -> check out the big swing in the park ->
shopping at quirky book store
Salsa class -> Drinks next door afterwards -> walk around neighborhood -> Your apartment
Interactive Improv comedy show -> Walk through the local park -> Dancing at a lounge near
her place
Include dancing if at all possible, as it’s the most sexual date activity you can have.Also, if you
two decide to drink, try to drink at the second or last venues/activities. You don't ever want to
end up hammered on a date
How to Behave on a Date:As I mentioned before, you want your dates to be interactive. You
want to be able to walk around, be able to touch and be as interactive as possible.
The underlying concept to have on a date is that you should try to constantly be leading.
Every decision should be yours and she should be expected to follow it. Remove, “What do you
want to do now?” from your dating vocabulary. Never say it again.
It should be like this: “Hey, let’s grab some tacos, I know a cool stand over here,” “I got an idea,
I’m going to kick your ass in air hockey,” “Let’s check out the Science museum, they have an
awesome exhibit on the human body,” etc.
As far as what to talk about, your conversations should be getting deeper and more personal.
There should be less teasing and playful banter and more conversations about your lives and
what’s important to you. Learn about her past, her passions, her dreams, what her favorite
things are.
At the same time, you don’t want to turn this into a job interview (which too many dinner dates
turn into), but elicit these topics by sharing them yourself.Again, this is the time to practice the
concepts you learned about last chapter, and this is where they should come to fruition. If you
do everything well and right, then you should be kissing her by the second half of the first date
and even take her home and have sex on many of your first dates.
Finally, the big question in our post-feminism world: who pays? This question plagued me for a
while. I used to be of the mind that I shouldn’t ever have to pay for women… but I actually lost
a few that way. Sure, I think it’s ridiculous, and I prefer a woman who is fine taking care of
herself. But after dating a lot of these women, I realized that there’s an intrinsic sense of
chivalry that they enjoy and makes them feel feminine and sexy.
After all, the primary attractor in women is status and security. Taking care of them and paying
for them can often lend itself to that.So why not?
The caveat is that most women will offer to pay out of politeness… but you’re supposed to
turn them down because it’s the gentleman thing to do (or something like that). Look, I didn’t
make this stuff up, but after being on probably 100+ dates with dozens of women, this is what
works for me:
Pay unless she physically pulls out her wallet/credit card and stops you. Until she physically
does that, just pay. Yes, once in a while you can get women buying you drinks and stuff —
there are even ways to influence them to do this — but at the end of the day, unless you’re
broke, take care of them. It’s a no-lose move and it will win you points with many of them.
Signals Women Give
Men are notoriously bad at recognizing “signals” women give them when they’re interested. In
the courtship process, it’s always the man’s responsibility to take action and make the moves,
and the woman’s responsibility to give him signals. The evolutionary reasons were explained in
Chapter 1 and 2.
This section will merely be a list of things to keep a look out for. Review it and make a point to
note these when they happen when you’re out and meeting women. Ideally, the better you get
at conversing and meeting them, the more signals you’ll receive.
Pre-Approach Signals
- Non-Accidental Eye Contact: When in doubt, assume it’s not accidental. Humans are
programmed to look at and focus on whatever they’re either curious about or that they find
attractive. If she’s looking at you even 10% more than the average stranger, then she’s at
least somewhat curious/interested in you. I make a point to approach every woman who makes
non-accidental eye contact with me, and it serves me well.
- Smiling: If eye contact means she’s interested, this means “you better come talk to me!”
- She Approaches You: This goes without saying, although a lot of guys are so oblivious, they
even miss this. If a woman approaches you, even if it’s to ask the time, about the weather, for
directions, or whatever, chances are she has some interest in talking to you.
- Proximity: This one is subtle, but the more you work on your lifestyle, body language and
style, the more of these you will get. It’s when a woman places herself near you when she
doesn’t have to. For instance, let’s say you’re sitting on a bus and an attractive woman gets
on. The entire bus is empty, yet she comes over and sits across from you. That means she
wants you to talk to her.Some other examples are when a woman comes and stands near you
in a store or shop looking at nothing in particular for a long amount of time.
Conversation Signals
- Excessive Smiling/Laughing: This is subjective and will require some judgment, but sometimes
you will notice one girl smiling and laughing a lot more than others when you speak. Chances
are she likes you.
- Flipping or Playing with Her Hair: Classic signal of flirtation.
- Eyes Dilate: Studies have shown our eyes dilate when we look at someone we’re attracted
to. Hard to notice, especially in some nighttime scenario. But this gives her eyes a much bigger
and wider look than normal… what you may call “big doe eyes.”
- Standing Closer to You Than Normal: self explanatory. Pay attention to where she positions
herself.
- Excessive Eye Contact: Same as excessive smiling. If she’s locked onto your gaze during a
conversation, that means she’s very interested in what you have to say. Most people break
eye contact very often, especially with people they just meet. If she doesn’t, that means she’s
interested in you.
- Prioritizes You: Another very subjective one. This can be very subtle. But it’s when her
actions subtly show you that she prioritizes you over interacting with others. The classic
example here is if you meet a girl at a bar and her friends come over and try to talk to her and
she ignores her friends. Most women, if they don’t like you, will drop you like a hot potato when
their friends come around. But if she ignores her friends or stays with you instead of walking off
with her friends, then that’s a clear indication that she likes to be around you.
Escalation Signals
- Isolates Herself with You: Often times the most overt advances a woman will make won’t be
in actually making a move (that’s your job), but they’ll actively work to put you in the easiest
situation possible. Let’s say I’ve been hanging out with a girl for most of the night and suddenly
she says, “let’s step outside for some fresh air, this bar is noisy,” she’s purposely isolating
herself with me as much as possible. This typically means she wants to be kissed.
- Ditches Her Friends For You: Goes along with the above… it takes a lot for a woman to leave
her friends behind for a guy, especially one she’s only known for a few hours or one night. If she
does this, take it as a bright green light.
- Touches You: Whether it’s un-provoked or her reciprocating you touching her (Chapter 15),
this is a clear signal that she likes you and wants you to continue escalating with her
physically.
Chapter 15: Physicality and Sex
“My girlfriend always laughs during sex... no matter what she’s reading.”
- Emo Phillips, Comedian
I ’m going to say this point-blank: getting physical with women, and getting physical quickly and
comfortably, is ultimately the difference between having a lot of female friends, and having a
lot of exgirlfriends and dates.
Being physical with women is by far the most integral piece of seduction and dating women. If
you have it, you will constantly have options. If you don’t, you will spend a lot of time alone.
I have a friend. He’s a decent-looking guy. He almost never approaches (except when he’s
drunk). He’s awkward to talk to. He has a strange sense of humor. But he gets physical with
women. He touches them early. He touches them often.And even if they don’t reciprocate or
move away. He tries again. He’s always going for it.
And you know what? He gets laid, constantly. Hot women too.
It’s amazing. I used to hang out with him and would watch him awkwardly stumble around
conversations, drinking too much, and awkwardly putting his arm around girls as the girls sat
there with a look of confusion. I’d watch him and think to myself,“Oh man, what a disaster.”
And then I’d come back 20 minutes later and he’d be making out with her. And then an hour
later he’d be going home with her. He just has no inhibitions whatsoever about going for it. He’s
always going for it. And until a girl clearly and firmly tells him “No!” he doesn’t stop, ever. And
like I said, he gets girls all the time.
The biggest trigger for arousal for women is being desired.And nothing says she’s desired like
a guy trying to kiss her.
Being physical on women is a necessary habit that most men who are poor with women never
do. Most men are a bit shy and hesitant when it comes to “making moves:” touching, the first
kiss, sexual touching, etc. Well, that needs to stop. From now on, you are a sexually aggressive
and dominant guy and you have no shame… We’ll also discover that women actually prefer
you to be this way.
There are two reasons for being physically aggressive. The first is that you want to make her
comfortable with being touched by you as soon as possible. You want to set the precedent for
the relationship that you are a physical person and that you’re comfortable with your body and
hers.
The other reason is psychological. People who touch when they interact with another person
are generally viewed as more dominant. All politicians and businessmen will touch somebody
on the arm as they greet them and shake their hand. Often times they’ll even touch them with
both hands.
Studies have shown that people being touched by somebody when they first meet them not
only have a much higher probability of thinking favorably of them, but they also were shown to
trust them quicker.
So how do you touch a girl right off the bat?
When you go up to start a conversation with her, just lightly touch her on the arm, near the
elbow. Don’t press hard or hold it, as that could startle her, but just a small tap. Once you’re
engaged in a conversation with her, you want to use your touching to punctuate the
conversation. Think of touching as the exclamation marks or question marks of the dialogue.
For instance, let’s say you make a clever joke and she begins to laugh really hard, you should
put your hand on her arm to punctuate the emotion of the moment.
The best way to touch is to integrate physicality into your conversation. For example, using
games such as thumb wars, twirling her like a ballerina, or giving high fives are great ways to
initiate physical contact. As the conversation goes on, the better things are going, the more
you want to be touching and the more personal you want your touches to be.
For instance, when I first meet a girl, I may just touch her on the arm, but 20 minutes later, if
she’s attracted to me and we’re having a deep conversation, I’ll have my arm around her and
her leaning into me. If you’re both sitting down, touching your leg to hers or resting your hand
on her thigh are good ways to create more personal ways to touch her.
Your touching should happen in a progression. In general, you want to start on the outside of
her body – her arms and legs – and slowly move closer into her body: put your hand on her
back as you move her to sit down with you, put your arm around her lower back as she leans
against the bar next to you, etc. Later on, this progression will continue into intimacy: tickling,
massages and cuddling (or spooning). And from there it will continue on into kissing, petting
and having sex.
Push and pull is a physical flirting technique that is instrumental in creating intimacy. It’s
basically touching combined with teasing.
Remember, in flirting, you go through the pattern of showing disinterest (breaking rapport) and
then letting her regain your interest (qualifying).
Push and pull is merely translating that into a physical form. Here are some examples:
1.You take her hand and twirl her around like a ballerina.She does it kind of awkwardly.You let
go of her hand and say, “NEXT!” and pretend to walk off with a smile. More often than not,
she’ll grab you and make you come back. Then you say, “OK, we’ll give it one more try.” You do
it again and say,“Not bad,” and hug her.
2.You’re on a date, taking a walk through the local gardens.She says something really cute, so
you say, “That’s too cute, I can’t handle it,” and lightly shove her away from you. See if she
comes back towards you.
If you push and pull well, you’ll increasingly find yourself in more intimate and emotional
situations with her. You can take any of the examples above and transition straight into
tickling her where you can end up on top of her and in perfect position to kiss her.
The purpose of push and pull isn’t an ends to itself, it’s a means to give you opportunities to
kiss her. One of the most common questions guys always have is, “how do I know when to kiss
her?” If you learn to push and pull well, you’ll find yourself in situation after situation where it
“feels” right – you’ll both be close, touching and emotionally charged. Opportunities should
come up over and over again.
Then, it’s just a matter of grabbing yourself by the balls and planting it on her.
Kissing
When it comes to kissing a woman, there’s an old adage amongst dating coaches: if you think
you can kiss her, you probably could have ten minutes ago. We men are notoriously bad at
gauging when a woman is ready to be kissed and then actually having the gusto to go for it.
So, in general, it’s safe to assume that anytime you think you could kiss her, you already could
have. Too many guys get hung up looking for “sign” after “sign” when girls have been giving
them signals all night. Think of it this way: it’s much better to try and kiss her and get rejected
than to go the whole night without making a move and never knowing what would have been.
So the rule of thumb is to always go for it.
Quick Note: There are some women who don’t kiss in public places. They feel like it’s in bad
taste and poor form. No matter how much they like you, they won’t do it. If it’s the first time
you’re trying to kiss her and she seems to want to do it but won’t, try again in a more private
setting.
The same goes for in front of all of her girlfriends. If she’s standing right next to four of her
closest friends, she’s probably not going to feel comfortable making out with you. Try moving
her somewhere more private.
Also, keep the first kiss PG-13. We want “church tongue” not “porno tongue” on the first time.
If you start devouring her tonsils on the first date, she’s going to start thinking you’re a sexcrazed
fiend.
If you aren’t sure whether you’re a good kisser or not, a good guideline is that if at least a few
girls haven’t complimented you on your kissing before, then you aren’t good enough. If you
haven’t kissed enough girls to know if they’d compliment you, then you’re definitely not good
enough.
There are other books out there to give guys techniques and form. I’ll just list a few DON’T’s.
• DON’T slobber all over her face.
• DON’T jam your tongue down her throat. Heavy tongue has its place, but it’s usually in the
bedroom when you guys are naked.
• DON’T peck her like she’s your grandmother.
• DON’T shove your face into hers or apply too much pressure. Kisses are sensual. Imagine
you’re massaging her lips with yours.
There’s a no quicker turn-off than a bad kisser. Seriously, I’ve heard women talk about not
calling a great guy back because he was awful at kissing. And even as a guy who’s kissed
hundreds of women at this point, I can tell you, a girl who is a bad kisser sometimes makes it
not even worth it. It can be unbearable at times. Make sure you get this down.
A lot of kissing revolves around how you use your hands and teeth as well. Your hands should
be roaming her body gently, caressing her back, gently holding her neck, pulling her hips into
yours.
One of my favorite things to do while making out with a girl is to grab her belt loops on her
pants and pull her hips into mine.
As for teeth, gentle love-nips on her bottom lip or her tongue turn a lot of girls on.Be sure to be
sensitive with your teeth though, and don’t overuse them.
Finally, the first few times you kiss a girl, try to always be the first one to pull away. It shows a
confidence and control that girls find attractive. It sub-communicates that you’re a sexual guy
and you’re comfortable with what’s going on.
Too many guys start making out with a girl and then immediately go into “OK, LET’S FUCK”
mode where they practically start molesting the girl wherever they are and devouring her face.
Kissing is simply the gateway to greater and deeper intimacy. Kissing is the only sexual action
that many girls are comfortable doing in public. It’s an important step, but part of the process,
not the destination.
Escalating
So you’ve kissed her. Now what?
Once a girl kisses you, she’s usually going to be comfortable and/or horny enough to go home
with you or have you go home with her. This assumes a couple things: that you kiss well and
turn her on, and that she feels safe with you. Different girls have different standards for these,
so you must be observant.
If she seems less excited after kissing you than she did before kissing you, then you need to
kiss and touch her better. If she seems nervous and uncomfortable when you try to get her to
leave with you, then she needs to trust you more. That means you have to open up to her a bit
more and talk about yourself and build more of an emotional connection. But also be sure
you’re keeping her turned on through some flirting and more kissing.
A lot of guys make big productions about getting a girl to come home with them: coming up
with elaborate stories and props, etc. If she wants to go home with you, she needs the mildest
of excuses to agree:
• “I’ve got the coolest dog, you should come see him.”
• “I’m not tired yet. Want to check out that movie I was talking about?”
• “I make an awesome omelet. Come over. I’ll make you one.”
I’ve gotten girls to come over with statements as simple as, “Let’s hang out at my place,” or
“You want to have a drink at my place?” If she’s comfortable with you and attracted to you,
she’ll follow your lead. These concepts hold true whether you just met her that night or you’re
on a third date with her. The amount of time isn’t as relevant as much as how secure she feels
around you.
So, you’ve got her back at your place, you guys are kissing on your couch, where do you go
from there? Remember when I said that your hands should gently be roaming her body while
you’re kissing? Now that you’re in a private, safe and intimate location, it’s time to roam your
hands into more sexual areas.
Start with her breasts. Don’t grab them straight out at first, but let a hand roam onto them and
massage it lightly, then move your hand off.
Hair-pulling, believe it or not, turns on most women. You have to do it the right way though.
Don’t grab and YANK her hair. What you want to do is just take some in your hand and clench
your fist so that there’s a nice squeeze on her hair. This actually feels REALLY good for her.
Another great place is to grab her ass. Again, don’t do it too aggressively (unless she’s so
horny she wants to fuck right away), but give it a nice squeeze. If she responds well – her
kissing gets more aggressive, she moans, basically any response other than moving your
hands away from her – then keep going. If you’re on a couch or bed, push her onto her back
and position yourself between her legs. If you’re standing up, push her against a wall and do
the same.
Next, you’ll want clothes to start coming off. If she’s letting you grab her breasts comfortably,
you can remove her shirt. If she’s wearing a skirt or dress, try moving your hands up her legs
under her dress.
The general principle at work here is that you want to gently push things towards sex until she
says stop. If she doesn’t say stop, keep going.
Next, take off your shirt. For whatever reason, when you take off your shirt, it subcommunicates
that you expect sex to happen more than her taking any of her clothes off. This
is usually where you’ll get the,“We’re not having sex tonight,” objection, if you do at all.
The correct answer to this objection is, “That’s fine. We’ll do whatever you’re comfortable
doing.” And mean it.
Yes, women often say “We’re not going to have sex tonight,” and then go ahead and have sex.
What you should take this objection for is that she does not want to have sex at that moment.
This can change, and often does. Usually what this objection indicates is that she is attracted
to you and even turned on by you, but she’s not completely comfortable with your intentions or
she doesn’t trust you yet.
By acknowledging her objection and letting her know you’re OK with it and still like her actually
goes a long way to making her feel more comfortable with you. That’s why the experience of,
“We’re not having sex tonight,” followed by actually having sex is so common.Acknowledge it
and keep moving forward until she makes you stop.
A quick note about rape: Remember, our general guideline here is that we continue until a
woman makes us stop. This means she physically stops you – i.e., moves your hands off of her,
moves away from you, puts her clothes back on, etc. – or clearly and verbally says, “STOP!” or
“NO!”
There’s a difference with the “We’re not having sex tonight,” objection. She’s not telling you to
stop, but telling you what to expect. There’s a huge difference. When a girl says, “STOP,” it
means, “STOP.” It’s not a game. It’s not a test. It’s not some clever social trick. It means STOP.
To pursue it any further after a woman has clearly tried to get you to stop is rape and you’d be
a fucked up individual to continue.
If a girl legitimately stops you, halt everything and ask her what the matter is. Often she’ll have
a legitimate concern. Other times, she’ll have a trivial or irrational concern (“I didn’t shave my
legs,” “I’m on my period,” “I promised myself I’d wait until the second date,” etc.)
Whether the concern is legitimate or not, always acknowledge it and then gauge the
seriousness of the issue. If her protest seems a bit irrational or silly, she’s probably just nervous
and needs to be more comfortable with you. Slow things down and try to make things more
comfortable for her.
If you try again and she stops you again, back off and give it some time. If she’s put up a lot of
resistance and you decide to call it quits, do NOT get angry about it. If you get angry, then
you’re really not going to get laid. She needs to know you understand, even if you really think
her complaint is irrational.
You also need to make a choice. How much do you like this girl? If you don’t like her and just
wanted to have sex with her, you might choose to leave or ask her to leave. If you really do
care about her, then you’re definitely doing the right thing. You have a brain, use some good
judgment.
Escalating like this is a skill that every man needs to become successful with women. If there
was one skill in the world that you could have that would make you the most successful with
women by itself, it would be aggressively escalating with women. It turns them on. Even when
they say no, it turns them on.
And in case you don’t believe me...
Just because it’s impossible for me to exaggerate how important it is to be a physical,
aggressive and sexual guy, here’s a post from a single woman on Craigslist. Guys who have
trouble with women never seem to be able to get it through their heads that women want us
to be aggressive, even if they turn us down. They’d rather have a guy go too far and back off
than not far enough. Just see below:
Dear Men of Craigslist,
Look, I know you men have it difficult. Women are just about impossible to understand, much
less please. In a post-feminist society, you never know exactly what you should be doing.
Women are bloody picky, I know we are. It can be scary, too, when women freak out about what
appear to be benign issues. And men who do their best to be respectful, female-positive
humans, I salute you, I do.
But please, please just fuck me already. Honestly, I appreciate your thoughtfulness. I like that
you want to take things slow. I can totally get behind the idea of emotional connection, but
dearjesusinheaven, FUCK ME. We’ve done dinner and drinks. We’ve gone dancing. We’ve
cuddled and watched a movie. I’m wearing a low cut shirt and you’ve been staring at my
breasts all night. Goodgodalmighty, get to it and fuck me.
When we get hot and heavy, please take charge. Please, please fuck me. Trust me, I’m not
going to just lie still – I’ll get involved. But don’t make me force your hand into my panties. That
makes me feel like a rapist. We’ve been kissing for a half hour and your hand keeps grazing my
ass. That’s nice, but it’s time to move forward. Get on top of me. Don’t make me get on top right
out of the gate and start bobbing up and down on your cock like I’m practicing some crazy new
aerobic yoga because YOU won’t go down on me. Roll on top and start dry humping like a
good boy should. Don’t gently suck my nipples and then pull back when I moan with pleasure.
You being coy is totally not what I want. It’s not what WE want.
OK, I know it’s scary. There are lots of women out there who make fucking really difficult. So, I
have compiled some handy tips. Don’t think of this as complaining, or as schadenfreude for the
Andrea Dworkins of the world. Just some simple tips, for timid men who have forgotten what it
means to fuck like men:
1. Taking charge is not bad. Oh, there will be some women who feel that you are pushy. If you
are making out with a woman, and she starts to push back, ask nicely if things are moving too
fast. If she says yes, say something like “I’m sorry – you just look so fucking delicious. I’ll go
slower.” Otherwise, skillfully move forward. If you start kissing a woman, and she responds well,
and before long, you’re both on the floor with her skirt pushed up, and you on top of her, it’s not
the time to roll onto your back and start awkwardly stroking the top of her head. Seriously, grow
a goddamn pair. YOU’RE the man. Act like one.
2. Ohmyfuckinggod, please learn to respect the clit. It’s different for every woman, so ask what
she likes. Do not, I repeat, do not just wiggle your fingers around her pussy like you’re trying to
tickle her. Do not drum your fingertips against her vulva like you are impatiently waiting at the
Sears Tire Center for your receipt. Do not push the clit like it is a doorbell at some house that
you need to get inside of. Start by using all four fingers with firm yet gentle pressure against the
outside of her pussy. Do not charge in with a single finger and start jabbing at things. And if you
really don’t know what to do, ask her. Just ask. “How do you like it?”. It’s a simple question, and
most women will answer straight out. If she’s being all coy, ask “Do you like pressure? Is it
sensitive?” The clitoris is a varied item, indeed. Treat each one as though you have never
encountered one before. Forget everything that your last partner liked.
3. Most women like to be fucked, and fucked well. Yes, there are women out there who want to
“make love” every time – sweet, gentle, rocking love with lots of eye contact and loving kisses.
Those women are not the majority. The majority like to be pounded. The majority like to have
their hair pulled. The majority like a good, solid jackhammering. When a woman is bucking
wildly against you, it’s not because she wants you to pull back and slowly swirl your cock
around her vagina like you’re mixing a cake batter up there. It’s because she wants you to hold
down her arms, or grab her hips, or push her legs above her head, and fuck her harder. Don’t
be too afraid of what this means as far as gender equality goes – I am a raging feminist bitch,
but I still want to be penetrated like you are planning on fucking my throat from the inside out.
4. A little roughness is nice. Do not pretend that you had no idea that some women like their
hair pulled. Do not act shocked if she wants you to spank her (“Really? Spanking? Won’t it
hurt?” – yes, it does. That’s the fucking point). We know you’ve read Stuff and Maxim, and that’s
all those laddie mags talk about in their “How to Please Her” sections. Start with light, full
handed smacks to the area of her ass that she sits on. Judge her response and continue on
from there. You don’t have to bend her over one knee and tell her she’s a naughty girl and that
Daddy’s going to punish her; save that for the fifth date. Women are less delicate than you
think, so don’t worry about breaking her hip.
5. It’s OK for you to make noise. Otherwise, we feel like we are fucking a ninja. Unless you
actually are a ninja, and have sneaked into our rooms with vibrating nanuchaku and zippered
black pajamas, please, please make some noise. If you’re banging a woman, and she’s crying
out and saying your name and moaning, and you can’t even manage a grunt, she’s going to
feel like an idiot. You don’t have to make the sounds she is making, but do SOMETHING. You
know how when you are watching porn, and the girl does something great to the guy and the
guy kind of goes “Ah!”, half grunt, half yell? That’s HOT. Do that. Whisper our name (assuming
you know it) gruffly. Groan against her neck when you’re in missionary position. You don’t have
to grunt like a mountain gorilla, but if you are totally mute, she’s going to get worried.
6. Most women like dirty talk, in addition to the grunting. If you’d like to get some dirty talk going,
ask her if she likes the way you fuck her. If she responds well, continue with something like, “I
love fucking you. God, you look so fucking hot.” Is she still moaning in response? “Your tits are
so beautiful.” Does that work? If she doesn’t respond well to the term “tits”, you might have to
stop there. If she keep moaning or responding, pass Go and collect $200. Try the following:
“Oh, god. Your pussy is SO tight.”
“You’re so wet – are you wet because you like the feel of my cock ramming you?”
“I think I’m going to come inside you. I’m going to fill up your little cunt.” It doesn’t matter that
you’re wearing a condom; we LOVE hearing this.
If all of those work, you can then progress to things like “sexy little bitch” and “dirty whore”.
Tread carefully, but please, tread. Do not tiptoe. Do not sit down. Charge.
6. You’re not obligated to eat a woman out. In return, she’s not obligated to choke on your dick.
Don’t skip one and expect the other. If you do eat a woman out, the only comment you should
make about her pussy is how nice it is. The length of her labia minora, the color of her interior,
her waxing job or full bush – you are not John Madden. No time for color commentary.
7. Do not bitch about condoms. Oh, we hate them. Trust us. They hurt us more than they hurt
you. But we don’t want to be preggers, and you don’t want to catch anything, right? Don’t whine
about condom sex. Do not explain that you can’t come with one on. LEARN to come with one
on, or if not, help us figure out what to do with you once we’re satisfied and it’s time for you to let
loose your load.
8. We really like it when you come. It’s called a money shot for a reason. Watching semen
shoot out of you is one of the most gratifying things EVER. However, do not assume that she
wants you to jack it off onto her face. She might, but don’t assume. Seeing and/or feeling you
come is rewarding for us, so there’s no need to deprive us of it, but please do consult us before
unleashing. “I think I’m going to come – how do you like it?” is a fair question that shouldn’t rob
you of your testicles.
In recent memory, I’ve been fucked by a very aggressive, manly guy, and I’ve been… well,
fucked is the wrong term here. I’ve been penetrated by a total and utter wuss. Who am I going to
run back to when I’m ready for my fill? Manly McHardon, that’s who.
Sex
It’s finally reached that point with a woman: time to have sex. This section will cover the basics
in both being good in the sack, and giving her a pleasant experience so that she’ll keep coming
back for more.
Once you’ve got some clothes off and you’re both on a bed, a couch, the bathroom floor – or
wherever you plan on doing the dirty – you’ve now entered the realm of foreplay. Sadly, men
overlook foreplay because we’re just too damn excited about getting our dicks wet. The more
foreplay, the hotter your woman’s going to be, the better sex she’s going to have, and the
more likely she’ll be to see you again.
A good place to start is by sucking and massaging her bare breasts. Some girls who like it
rougher like it when you gently bite on their nipples, but be careful, not every girl is into that.
From there, you should at least finger her or rub her clitoris.Again, this book is not going to get
technical with how exactly to do that. Plenty of other books go into that (see the Further
Reading section).
If you enjoy giving girls oral sex, this is an excellent time to do that as well. If you give good oral
sex, most girls won’t be able to resist the urge to have sex then and there (some will even grab
you and make you do it).
The most important thing to keep in mind about foreplay is the concept of teasing or
expectation. As you do the things talked about above, don’t just rush into them and devour
her. That can be cool sometimes, but in general, you want to take things slow, create a drawn-
out and sensual experience. Girls love to be teased. For instance, instead of just shoving your
finger inside her and going at it trying lightly touching her pussy with your fingertips for a few
seconds.She’ll go crazy and want you inside her more than ever.
Instead of just giving her oral sex, start off slow by kissing the inside of her thighs, inching
closer and closer. Create expectation. Make her yearn for whatever you’re about to do to her.
Stuff like this drives girls crazy and makes them incredibly horny. If you do this well and
repeatedly, you’ll often get girls pushing YOU down and forcing YOU to have sex. The
expectation is too much. They have to have it.So they end up taking it from you.
When it comes to sex, more important than any physical technique – some cool angle or
position or whatever – is being dominant. Sexual gratification for women is far more
psychological than it is physical, whereas for men it’s mostly physical. A large component of
this psychological satisfaction comes from being dominated and surrendering control. Women
like to feel like you have the power and the control in the bedroom. They want you to be
assertive and strong with what you want.So how do you become dominant in bed?
1. Be loud. Make noise. Grunt. Breathe hard. Women love this because it makes them feel like
they can be loud.And when they’re loud they get off easier and more often.
2. Talk dirty. Tell her how sexy she is. Tell her what you’re going to do to her before you do it.
Call her a dirty girl and a horny slut. This may be outside of your comfort zone, but realize that
in the bedroom the rules change and logic goes out the window.
3. Get physical. Spank her. Pull her hair. Hold her down with one hand. When you change
positions, literally pick her up and move her yourself.
4. Don’t ever ask,“Is this OK? Do you want to do X?” Just do it and stop later if she doesn’t like
it and apologize. Nothing turns a girl off faster than a guy who defers to her too much while
having sex. Take control. Do what turns you on and that will then turn her on.
The most important habit to develop, by far, is to talk and be expressive in the bedroom. There
has to be an open forum of communication when you sleep with a girl, especially the first few
times you’re together. Sex is always somewhat awkward the first time you’re with a new
person. Everybody engages in different practices, habits and prefers different things. It takes
awhile to learn each other’s tendencies and adapt to one another’s likes and dislikes.
This requires you to have a sense of humor in the bedroom. Goofy and weird moments are
going to happen in the sack and most people are at their most insecure when they’re naked
and lying under someone they just met a week ago.
Have a sense of humor.Be understanding. Relax.
One of my favorite jokes in the bedroom when stuff goes awry is, “They make it look so easy in
the movies.” If you can get a girl to crack up, she’ll forget she’s naked, forget she’s in a strange
position and forget that you just screwed up and just be with you, laughing with you.
Also, be honest. If you don’t like the way she gives a blowjob, tell her and then tell her how you
do like it. But also, be honest with the compliments. Tell her she’s beautiful naked. Tell her you
love how she rides you. Tell her she looks sexy in that position.
Be open and honest. Communicate. The most important factor for good sex is how
comfortable the two people are around each other.
A lot of men feel anxious around sexuality and actually get nervous once they know they’re
going to have it. But if you bring up sexual anxiety, almost every guy will laugh and say, “Must
suck for that guy,” as if they don’t have it. The rotten truth is that most of us have some form
of it or another. There are a variety of causes for sexual anxiety, but the most common are:
• Inexperience
• Strict religious and/or cultural upbringing
• Negative past sexual experiences
• Past emotional trauma
• Low self-esteem
Ultimately, the causes of sexual anxiety are directly related to other forms of anxiety:
neediness, and a fear of vulnerability.
There are two symptoms, and you either have one or the other. You either cum way too fast
(less than 10 minutes) or you either can’t get hard or you can’t keep it hard.
But that doesn’t make sense. How can two completely opposite phenomena be caused by the
same thing?
It’s basically a permutation of the “fight or flight” response. The idea is that when you become
nervous and adrenaline is released, your body wants to get itself into a protected and safe
position as soon as possible. One way to do this is to ejaculate immediately. The other is to
just not keep it hard.
Either way, these problems suck. I’m not sure which one’s worse. But we have ways to combat
this problem.
If you finish way too quickly, try finding a thicker condom. They actually make condoms now
that purposely numb your penis so that you can last longer. Try masturbating a few hours
before you expect to have sex.
If you have trouble getting it up or keeping it up, get pills. Seriously, there are herbal
supplements that you can buy over the counter that act similarly to Viagra. They make you
hard as an ox and able to go multiple times. Take a couple before you get intimate with a girl
and you shouldn’t have any problems keeping it at attention.
But these remedies are merely band-aid solutions for a larger problem.
The larger problem is not being completely comfortable with your sexuality and having sex. It’s
once again a vulnerability issue. This problem reaches much deeper and lurks within our
subconscious. The most obvious solution is to simply have as much sex as possible. This
works. Getting a steady girlfriend is the best way to do this.
Unfortunately, if you want to stay single, this will take a lot of time and effort.And you have to
deal with a lot of demoralizing failures. Try taking it slow with the girl once you know you’re
going to have sex with her.
Think of it as having to make yourself more secure and comfortable around her until you’re
able to have sex. I know it sounds lame, but it’s true. Slow things down, enjoy the foreplay
more, and don’t pressure yourself to get to it until you’re good and ready.
Practice closing your eyes and relaxing when you know you’ll be having sex with her. If you
have trouble with getting too excited, think about something non-sexual like baseball or video
games. If you have trouble getting it up, relax and just look at her and think about how sexy
she is.
If you feel that you have some sort of emotional trauma in your past or were raised in a
seriously sexually repressed environment, consider seeking counseling or therapy.
Regardless, once you’ve reached this point, you’ve reached the point of maximum vulnerability
with one person. Typically, women become more highly-invested after sex and men become
less invested after sex. The power dynamic in most couples will switch at this point. The power
of choice that the woman had (whether to have sex or not) now usually switches over to the
man (whether to commit or not). If this power dynamic doesn’t switch, it’s usually a sign of
neediness in the man, and the attraction will not last.
Vulnerability need not be confused with commitment or attachment. It’s still possible to
experience an intense and powerful emotional connection with a woman and never desire
long-term commitment with one another.
But such emotional connections, no matter how powerful and intoxicating, are fickle and akin
to a drug. True, long-lasting emotional connection can only come through submitting to longterm
commitment.But that is a topic beyond the scope of this book.
Closing
Conclusion: Moving Ahead
T here’s a lot to digest in this book.And if you’re a first-timer who hasn’t started his journey of
self-improvement to become more attractive to women, it’s easy to get overwhelmed and
wonder where to start.
That’s why I’ve put together this small Action Plan at the end of the book, to not only give you
a clear place to start, but also help you see what you should focus on and in which order.
The Action Plan is divided up into sections of five tasks or challenges. Once you’ve completed
at least four of the tasks in each section, move on to the next section. In Section 1, some tasks
you will naturally have handled. For instance, if you already work out regularly, then that’s fine.
In other sections, an item doesn’t count unless you do it since starting that section. For
instance, in Section 5, you’re challenged to have sex with a woman you’ve never had sex with
before. Obviously not everyone reading this is a virgin. Some of you may even have sex with a
woman in previous sections.But it doesn’t count until you get to section 5.
Obviously, these aren’t rigid rules. But the sections are laid out here to challenge you and give
you clearly defined goals and benchmarks to strive for. In all sections, some tasks will be very
easy for you. Others will be very difficult. It will vary from person to person, but the idea is to
give you a vague path to follow when it comes to improving yourself.
Also realize that this is a long-term process. A lot of these tasks won’t be completed in one
night or even in one weekend. A lot of them will require weeks or months of effort. But that’s
OK. That means you probably really needed to work on it.
Level 1: Your Foundation (Complete 5 of 5)
- Join a gym: If you’re not already a member of a gym, join one. If you’re not familiar with how to
work out properly, hire a personal trainer. Make this a weekly habit.
- Upgrade your wardrobe: Go out and upgrade your wardrobe based on the recommendations
in Chapter 8. Challenge yourself to wear nicer clothes than you’ve ever worn before. It’ll change
how you feel about yourself.
- Get a nice haircut: Go to a salon and drop the $50 on it. It’s worth it. It makes a difference.
- Job security/satisfaction: This is a complicated one, but if you’re not happy with your work
situation, take some time and plan a way to fix it. If you work too much, try to find a way to
work less. If you’re unemployed, stop everything else and get a job.
- Pursue one social hobby regularly: Pick a social hobby and pursue it regularly. You may
already have one, but if not, find one. It could be dance classes, public speaking courses,
language courses, cooking classes, joining a band, etc. Whatever it is, make it social. That
means sitting at home and perfecting your model airplanes doesn’t count.
Level 2: Meeting Women (Complete 4 of 5)
- Figure out demographics: Figure out your demographics based on the recommendations in
Chapter 7. Write down the type of women you’d like to meet and the places you enjoy going
most. Then find venues or events where those two things intersect. It could be independent
rock concerts, it could be art gallery showings, it could be salsa nights. Whatever it is, find your
niche and pursue it.
- Approach 5 women in one day:Self-explanatory
- Approach 20 women in one week:Also self-explanatory.
- Join an online dating site and email 10 women:Also selfexplanatory. If you’re under 30 years
old, Irecommend free dating sites. If you’re over 30 years old, Irecommend pay sites.
- Sign up for a singles or speed-dating event: If you have trouble doing the approaching tasks,
then this may give you a needed boost in the right direction.
Level 3: Getting to Know Women (Complete 3 of 4)
- Hold at least three 30-minute conversations with women you just met: Can be anywhere.
- Get three phone numbers from women you just met: Just ask, you’ll be surprised how many
women will give them to you.
- Go on two dates: They can come from women you met anywhere.
- Approach 25 women in one weekend: For those of you who really want to push your ability to
cold approach.
Level 4: Getting Intimate (Complete 3 of 4)
- Kiss two women: Make sure they’re women you’ve met since reading this book.
- Go on a second date with the same woman:Self-explanatory.
- Successfully get a woman back to your place: Usually can be done on the second date.
- Get five phone numbers in one week: In case you’re having trouble getting dates, you can do
this.
Level 5: Getting Sexual (Complete 3 of 3)
- Have sex with a woman you’ve never had sex with before:Self explanatory
- Kiss a woman you just met that day/night: This is more doable than you think. Recommended
you do this in a loud bar or nightclub.
- Go on three first dates with new women:Self explanatory.
Level 6: Solid Game (Complete 2 of 3)
- Have sex with a woman you met that same day/night:Again, recommended you do this with a
woman you meet in a bar or night club. Bringing a woman home you meet during the day is
more difficult, but not impossible.
- Have sex with a woman on the first date: Make sure it’s a damn good date!
- Kiss three women the day/night you meet them: Can be done on separate nights. Also
recommended to do this at a bar or nightclub.
Epilogue: What If It Was a Gift?
O ver the course of the previous 280 pages, we’ve discovered that attraction flows from
women perceiving True Confidence and a sense of security in men. This confidence and
security arises from having a stronger identity and investment in oneself than in the perception
of others. This sub-communicates that as a man you’re dependable, confident and high status
(or likely to become high status).
The way to cultivate a higher investment in oneself, the way to become more confident, is
actually counter-intuitive. We learned that showing vulnerability, both in emotion and action,
actually leads to a higher investment in oneself and higher True Confidence.
This newfound confidence then allows you to express yourself more clearly and directly. When
you express yourself more clearly and directly, you polarize the reactions of women, opening
yourself up to more rejection, but also attracting other women stronger than ever before.
Attracting women occurs through a process of self-selection. The rate at which you attract
them happens through a process of overcoming fear.And the consistency in which you seduce
those women attracted happens through a process of expressing your sexuality. These are
the three fundamentals.
Presented in these pages are all of the tools I can ever imagine a man ever needing to
renovate himself and become more successful with women. Undoubtedly for you it will be
difficult at times. You will run into speed-bumps, detours, distractions, emotional highs and
emotional lows.But if you persist and stay optimistic, you will get there. I’m absolutely sure of it.
And in those times that it does become difficult, those times where you do get frustrated and
fall back to your unconfident beliefs, your desire for external validation, where you let yourself
become swayed by the whims of others rather than your internal compass, you may feel lost or
hopeless. This feeling of hopelessness may last for minutes, hours or days, but chances are if
you push yourself, if you genuinely try to change yourself and re-orient how you interact with
the world, then you will feel it at some point.
And for those times, let me share with you a phrase that has helped me and countless other
men through those dire straits.
The phrase comes from Dr. Robert Glover and his book No More Mr. Nice Guy, one of the best
books I’ve ever read on men’s emotional health and development.
The phrase is:“What if it was a gift?”
Whatever happens to you, no matter how bad, no matter how bleak you feel. Ask yourself,
“What if it was a gift?” And then try to rationalize a way it could be so.
Because see, in the world of emotions, there are no absolutes, you can usually draw whichever
conclusions you desire. So why not choose to draw conclusions of blessings, positivity and
gifts?
Ex-girlfriend dumped you and left you for another man. What if it was a gift? Because without
her, you would not have been put on this path of self-improvement, and you would have
forever been stuck in a relationship full of deceit and no self-awareness.
A woman makes fun of your hair and calls you ugly. What if it was a gift? Such a harsh rejection
will steel you into becoming even more confident in the future, and hopefully, will inspire you to
re-evaluate how you look.
Your friends tell you that approaching women is creepy and that you’re a loser for wanting to
do it. What if it was a gift? It shows that what you’re doing, what you’re working on, is pushing
social boundaries, is polarizing, and is ultimately making you more controversial and attractive.
When I was 19 years old, a friend of mine drowned right in front of me. We were at a party on a
lake. One minute he was there, laughing, smiling, joking, and the next moment he was gone.
Forever. It was one of the biggest gifts I’ve ever been given. Not because it was good. It was
tragic.But because of how it affected me ever since.
Obviously that night was shocking and traumatizing. But I came away from the experience
with a keen awareness of how transient this existence is. How any of us can be taken at any
moment. How no one is going to live my life for me, and every second I spend sitting around
feeling distant from my true desires, avoiding the world and being afraid to engage it, is a
second that I’m forfeiting the biggest gift of all: my time here in this life.
His death shocked me, depressed me and scared me, but it scared me into having the courage
to take risks, to express myself, to invest in my self-perception more than the perceptions of
others. Because after all, sooner or later this will all disappear, and none of it will matter. So you
might as well make the most of it while you’re here.
And ultimately, that’s all that I can hope for you. That you make the most of your time here.
That you take the tools I’ve laid out here and go out and forge a unique path for yourself, and
experience the love, the thrills, and the happiness that this life can reward you.
Because that is what life does: it rewards you. It’s giving you gifts every day.
Are you going to accept them?
Glossary
Anxiety – A general emotional state of fear and apprehension brought on repeatedly by a
certain situation. Anxiety is conquered through Courage. See Also: Sexual Anxiety, Social
Anxiety, Courage
Arousal – The process in which someone is sexually stimulated, physically, psychologically or
emotionally. Current research posits women are primarily aroused through displays of sexual
intent and bold behaviors.See Also: Sexual Intent, Courage
Assortment Effect – The psychological term for the observed tendency for men and women
of similar beliefs and self-perceptions to attract one another. For instance, a man with low selfesteem
will attract women with low self-esteem. A man with a positive attitude towards sex
will attract women with positive attitudes towards sex.See Also: Demographics
Attractive Behavior – Confident behavior, both in one’s everyday life, as well as direct
interactions with women. Attractive behavior is usually a result of vulnerability, although not
always.See Also: Lifestyle, Neediness
Boundaries – The limit of interaction and communication one finds acceptable. Boundaries
can be strong or weak based upon the person’s confidence level. For instance, John lacks
confidence and therefore lets his dates make fun of him without saying anything. Sally has
high confidence and does not tolerate her date being 20 minutes late to pick her up. Strong
boundaries are both a cause and effect of True Confidence. Standing up for one’s boundaries
often triggers attraction and always generates greater respect.See Also: True Confidence
Confidence – One’s belief in themselves and their ability and competence in a certain
situation. Confidence is context-dependent. One can be confident in a boardroom but horribly
unconfident in a sexual relationship. Confidence is often confused with self-esteem. Lack of
confidence in romantic situations is a reflection of neediness, which is a component of low selfesteem.
Confident behavior is always attractive. See Also: True Confidence, False
Confidence, Self-Esteem
Confidence, False - Men who overcompensate for their low selfesteem and lack of
confidence by imposing their will and needs onto others unnecessarily. False Confidence is
often preoccupied with sleeping with as many women as possible. False Confident behavior is
often promoted within the Pick Up Artist industry and the so-called “man-o-sphere.” False
Confidence behavior can come across as confident but is still low-status behavior because it is
over-invested in the perceptions of others. Men who use False Confidence experience shortterm
sexual success but long-term emotional failure. See Also: Self-Esteem, True Confidence,
Pick Up Artist
Confidence, True – Being more invested in your opinion of yourself than the opinions others
have of you. True Confidence is one component of having high self-esteem and the root of all
attractive behavior. True Confidence is achieved through practicing vulnerability and in
investing in oneself.See Also: Confidence, Neediness, SelfEsteem
Courage – The ability to perform an action despite feeling fear and anxiety about doing it.
See Also: Anxiety
Creepy – To express one’s sexuality in such a way that makes a woman uncomfortable or
less secure. Creepy behavior can happen consciously or unconsciously. See Also: Sexual
Intent, Flirting
Dating Success – Maximizing one’s happiness with the woman/women one chooses. It is
important to note that it is NOT determined by numbers, sexual encounters, appearances, etc.,
but by happiness.
Defense Mechanisms – Psychological reactions to anxiety that cause one to avoid taking
action. Examples include blame, anger, projection, rationalizations, apathy, etc. See Also:
Anxiety, Courage
Demographics – The idea that you will experience greater success (happiness) and
efficiency by pursuing women in areas of your life that you excel at or enjoy. For instance, if you
are a musician, then you are more likely to experience dating success by meeting women at
concerts and music events.See Also: Assortment Effect, Lifestyle
Emotional Connection – A mutual emotional investment between two people. This
investment generates a feeling of closeness and greater empathy. Can often trigger arousal
and sexual desire.
Finding Your Truth – A two-part process of 1) removing behaviors which are based on
receiving the approval of others rather than your own values and 2) getting in touch with
emotions and desires which were previously unconscious. Finding one’s truth is based on the
idea that most of our behaviors and beliefs are actually unconscious habits we picked up for
the wrong reasons throughout our lives. Getting in touch with one’s real emotions and desires
and discarding the unconfident habits and behaviors leads one to become more vulnerable,
less needy, and therefore more attractive. See Also: Attractive Behavior, Non-Neediness,
Vulnerability
Flake – A specific form of rejection. When a woman demonstrates interest or says she will see
you again and then never does.
Flirting – The demonstration of sexual intent in a fun and playful manner. Successful flirting
makes women feel secure with your sexual intent. The opposite of creepy. See Also: Creepy,
Sexual Intent
Friction – Circumstances and causes that prevent sexual escalation from occurring despite
there being mutual attraction. For instance, two people may be very attracted to one another,
but one is married and the other lives in another town.
Lifestyle – A blanket term for the quality and types of activities, interests and people one
spends the majority of their time with. Your profession, the place you live, hobbies, friends, and
weekend trips are all components of your overall lifestyle. Your lifestyle is a reflection of your
values and self-esteem and also determines your demographics.A lifestyle can be based upon
unconfident behavior (i.e., dressing a certain way or driving a certain car in order to impress
women).See Also: Demographics
Limiting Beliefs – Irrational beliefs that inherently prevent one from being successful at
something. Limiting beliefs are almost always untrue and results of defense mechanisms and a
lack of courage.An example is a man who believes that women will never be attracted to him
because he’s bald, therefore he doesn’t even try.See Also: Defense Mechanisms, Courage
Objectification – The decision to view women and social interactions as impersonal
processes and objects rather than people and emotional activities. Seeing women as numbers,
subjects to be studied, games to be won, etc., are all common ways which men objectify their
sexual and emotional lives. Emotions are ignored and discouraged from being expressed. False
Confidence and Performance behaviors both encourage objectification in order to achieve
short-term success. Objectification causes long-term emotional damage and can lead to
depression and even lower levels of self-esteem. This is the reason for the paradoxical
situation many long-time men of False Confidence find themselves in: they have many sexual
partners but find themselves to actually be less happy than they were when they started. See
Also: False Confidence, Pick Up Artists
Pain Period – The period of time when one begins to open themselves up emotionally and
make themselves more vulnerable to others. This temporarily causes one to behave in a less
attractive manner as they sort through years of emotional baggage and trauma. It’s usually a
period accompanied by a lot of emotional stress and pain. The pain period is necessary to go
from a low self-esteem and unconfident person to a high self-esteem and True Confidence
person.See Also: Vulnerability, True Confidence
Pick Up Artist – A school of dating advice based on the teachings of Erik von Markovik
(Mystery) and Neil Strauss (Style), as well as Real Social Dynamics. Pick Up Artists are
characterized by their own specific lingo and measurement for success, which is getting laid as
much as possible.Pick Up Artists objectify their emotional and sexual lives and therefore cause
long-term psychological damage to themselves despite often remedying short-term emotional
problems. Many Pick Up Artist teachings encourage False Confidence and
Performance behavior.See Also: False Confidence, Performance, Objectification
Polarization – Behavior that forces a woman to feel strongly about you, whether positive or
negative. Polarization is useful for screening out women who are most compatible with you
very quickly. Polarization not only invites rejection, but uses it as a tool to achieve dating
success efficiently.See Also: Assortment Effect, Demographics, Rejection
Projection – A common defense mechanism used by both men and women to avoid anxiety.
Projection is when you perceive the source of your anxiety to have the insecurity rather than
yourself. For instance, an Indian man who is insecure about his race will project onto the
women he meets that they are racist and don’t like him because he’s Indian. A man who is
insecure about women being mean to him will project onto women who intimidate him that
they are bitches and use that as a reason to avoid them. Women project as well.As a man, it is
possible to be rejected a woman who is very attracted to you because she’s insecure or
uncomfortable with her sexuality. For instance, if a woman is low self-esteem and perceives
you to be too attractive for her, she will project onto you that insecurity and get mad at you for
only wanting her for sex. This is the reason why less attractive women may reject you more
often and harsher than more attractive women.See Also: Defense Mechanisms
Rejection – When a woman demonstrates a lack of interest in a man’s sexual intent.
Rejection can be overt (i.e., “I have a boyfriend, sorry,”) or subtle (i.e., flaking, going to the
bathroom and not coming back, etc.).
Seduction - The process in which a man induces a woman to become more highly invested in
him than he is in her. Sex is a side effect of this process. Women are generally always less
invested at the beginning of an interaction because they almost always have more sexual and
romantic options than men do.
Self-Esteem – One’s unconscious perception of their own value or selfworth. Confidence in
sexual interactions is one component of having high self-esteem. For the sake of clarity, this
book uses the term “True Confidence” in place of self-esteem in most cases. See Also: True
Confidence, Attractive Behavior, Finding Your Truth
Self-Selection – The unconscious process of the assortment effect. Self-Selection is the idea
that no matter what you do or who you are, you are going to be attractive to one particular
demographic and unattractive to others. For instance, if you’re tall and bald, you’re going to
unconsciously screen for women who like tall, bald men for no other reason than women who
don’t will reject you or display no interest in you. If you’re a foreigner, then you will automatically
self-select for women who are interested in foreigners without having to do anything. Similar to
the assortment effect, but instead of reflecting beliefs and attitudes, self-selection reflects
superficial preferences.See Also: Assortment Effect, Demographics
Sexual Anxiety – When one experiences apprehension and fear when expressing their
sexuality or when confronted with sexual situations.See Also: Courage, Defense Mechanisms
Sexual Escalation – The process in which two people become more and more sexually
engaged. Typically follows a pattern of light touching, to holding and heavy touching, to kissing,
then foreplay and eventually sex.
Sexual Intent – An expressed desire to have sexual relations with someone. Can be overt
and obvious or subtle and implied through flirting.See Also: Creepy, Flirting
Social Anxiety – When one experiences fear and apprehension in social situations or when
meeting new people.See Also: Courage, Defense Mechanisms
Social Circle – A group of mutual friends and acquaintances.
Social Proof – The psychological mechanism where if many other people value something,
then we will value it as well. In attraction, the theory goes that if a number of other people or
women are attracted to you, then one specific woman will become more attracted to you. Only
applicable in social circle situations. For instance, if you walk into a bar and a number of women
show interest in you, then a woman on the other side of the bar who shares no mutual
acquaintances is not going to care. But if you walk into a bar and three of a woman’s female
friends know you and like you, then she is likely to be attracted to you before you even speak
to her.
Unconditionality – Performing an action or saying something with no expectations of
receiving anything in return. Men often do attractive behaviors or nice things with the
expectation that the girl now owes them something in return. A common example is he will
compliment her with the expectation that she’s supposed to be nice to him in return. This is
conditional behavior. Conditional behavior is unconfident and generally backfires and makes
one appear less attractive. Unconditional behavior is an action with no expectations for
anything in return. Unconditionality is non-needy, therefore attractive.
Vulnerability – Being unguarded or undefended in expressing one’s thoughts and emotions.
Most men hide the thoughts and emotions they believe will make them less attractive. This
forces them to behave conditionally and base their behaviors on the beliefs and perceptions of
those around them. This is unconfident behavior and ultimately makes them unattractive.
Paradoxically, making oneself vulnerable and surrendering to criticism and not expecting
anything in return from others causes one to build self-esteem, become more confident and
more attractive.
Further Reading
1. If you feel you gained a lot from this book and have never read my website, then that is the
next logical destination. It’s
www.postmasculine.com and is regularly updated with articles, musings and stories.
2. If you’d like specific and structured programs to improve your abilities with women based on
the ideas in this book, I’ve set up online programs that are designed to take men of any level
and progressively give you exercises and goals to improve a specific skill related to women.
You can learn more about my online program here:
Approach Women Online Program: http://postmasculine.com/approach
Connection Online Program:
http://postmasculine.com/connection
The Sexual Confidence Program:
http://postmasculine.com/sexual-confidence
For Men’s Fashion Advice, check out The Style Guide For Men: http://postmasculine.com/styleguide
3. Recommended Reading:
No More Mr. Nice Guy by Robert Glover — the definitive book on helping men break out of
habits of neediness and ending “Nice Guy” behavior that sabotages their relationships.
How to Win Friends and Influence People by Dale Carnegie — A classic. Best book on how to
relate and make strong impressions on others.
The Evolution of Desire by David Buss — A good scientific overview of sex studies and
biological differences in male and female sexuality.
The Definitive Book of Body Language by Allan and Barbara Pease —
A must-read for anyone who has trouble deciphering people’s emotions through body
language.
The Way of the Superior Man by David Deida — A spiritual overview of masculinity and what it
means to be a man in a relationship with women.
Emotional Intelligence by Daniel Goleman — Why your ability to relate and empathize with
others trumps intellectual intelligence and determines the quality of your relationships.
The Red Queen by Matt Ridley — Deep science book about human sexuality and the social
implications of our biology.
Primal Blueprint by Mark Sisson — Best book on nutrition I’ve read.A variation on the popular
paleo diet. Highly recommended if you’re looking to lose weight.
About the Author
M ark Manson is from Austin, Texas, USA and graduated from Boston University in 2007. He
began coaching men informally that same year, taking them out to local bars and helping them
approach attractive women.
Mark founded Practical Pick Up in 2008 and has since worked with hundreds of men in 12
different countries and four different continents. He’s given over 40 public presentations
worldwide and has been interviewed for news shows and magazines.
In 2011, he changed his business to PostMasculine.com to change his focus away from simply
meeting and attracting women and to help with life’s issues at large.
Mark currently lives a mobile lifestyle traveling and residing across the globe. He can be
reached at mark@postmasculine.com.
Table of Contents
Copyright
Introduction: Movement
Part I: Reality
Chapter 1: What Attracts Women
Chapter 2: True Confidence
Chapter 3:Power in Vulnerability
Chapter 4: The Gift of Truth
Part II:Strategy
Chapter 5:Polarization
Chapter 6: Rejection and Success
Chapter 7: The Three Fundamentals
Part III: Honest Living
Chapter 8: Demographics
Chapter 9: How to Be Attractive
Part IV: Honest Action
Chapter 10: What Are Your Stories?
Chapter 11: How To Overcome Anxiety
Part V: Honest Communication
Chapter 12:Your Intentions
Chapter 13: How to Be Charming
Chapter 14: The Dating Process
Chapter 15:Physicality and Sex
Closing
Conclusion: Moving Ahead
Glossary
Further Reading
About the Author


The Subtle
A t of Not
Givi g a Fuck
A Counterintuitive Approach
to Livin a Good Life
MARK M.ANSON
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1: Don’t Try
The Feedback Loop from Hell
The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck
So Mark, What the Fuck Is the Point of This Book Anyway?
CHAPTER 2: Happiness Is a Problem
The Misadventures of Disappointment Panda
Happiness Comes from Solving Problems
Emotions Are Overrated
Choose Your Struggle
CHAPTER 3: You Are Not Special
Things Fall Apart
The Tyranny of Exceptionalism
B-b-b-but, If I’m Not Going to Be Special or Extraordinary, What’s the Point?
CHAPTER 4: The Value of Suffering
The Self-Awareness Onion
Rock Star Problems
Shitty Values
Defining Good and Bad Values
CHAPTER 5: You Are Always Choosing
The Choice
The Responsibility/Fault Fallacy
Responding to Tragedy
Genetics and the Hand We’re Dealt
Victimhood Chic
There Is No “How”
CHAPTER 6: You’re Wrong About Everything (But So Am I)
Architects of Our Own Beliefs
Be Careful What You Believe
The Dangers of Pure Certainty
Manson’s Law of Avoidance
Kill Yourself
How to Be a Little Less Certain of Yourself
CHAPTER 7: Failure Is the Way Forward
The Failure/Success Paradox
Pain Is Part of the Process
The “Do Something” Principle
CHAPTER 8: The Importance of Saying No
Rejection Makes Your Life Better
Boundaries
How to Build Trust
Freedom Through Commitment
CHAPTER 9: . . . And Then You Die
Something Beyond Our Selves
The Sunny Side of Death
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher
CHAPTER 1
Don’t Try
Charles Bukowski was an alcoholic, a womanizer, a chronic gambler, a lout, a cheapskate, a
deadbeat, and on his worst days, a poet. He’s probably the last person on earth you would ever look
to for life advice or expect to see in any sort of self-help book.
Which is why he’s the perfect place to start.
Bukowski wanted to be a writer. But for decades his work was rejected by almost every
magazine, newspaper, journal, agent, and publisher he submitted to. His work was horrible, they said.
Crude. Disgusting. Depraved. And as the stacks of rejection slips piled up, the weight of his failures
pushed him deep into an alcohol-fueled depression that would follow him for most of his life.
Bukowski had a day job as a letter-filer at a post office. He got paid shit money and spent most of
it on booze. He gambled away the rest at the racetrack. At night, he would drink alone and sometimes
hammer out poetry on his beat-up old typewriter. Often, he’d wake up on the floor, having passed out
the night before.
Thirty years went by like this, most of it a meaningless blur of alcohol, drugs, gambling, and
prostitutes. Then, when Bukowski was fifty, after a lifetime of failure and self-loathing, an editor at a
small independent publishing house took a strange interest in him. The editor couldn’t offer Bukowski
much money or much promise of sales. But he had a weird affection for the drunk loser, so he decided
to take a chance on him. It was the first real shot Bukowski had ever gotten, and, he realized,
probably the only one he would ever get. Bukowski wrote back to the editor: “I have one of two
choices—stay in the post office and go crazy . . . or stay out here and play at writer and starve. I have
decided to starve.”
Upon signing the contract, Bukowski wrote his first novel in three weeks. It was called simply
Post Office. In the dedication, he wrote, “Dedicated to nobody.”
Bukowski would make it as a novelist and poet. He would go on and publish six novels and
hundreds of poems, selling over two million copies of his books. His popularity defied everyone’s
expectations, particularly his own.
Stories like Bukowski’s are the bread and butter of our cultural narrative. Bukowski’s life
embodies the American Dream: a man fights for what he wants, never gives up, and eventually
achieves his wildest dreams. It’s practically a movie waiting to happen. We all look at stories like
Bukowski’s and say, “See? He never gave up. He never stopped trying. He always believed in
himself. He persisted against all the odds and made something of himself!”
It is then strange that on Bukowski’s tombstone, the epitaph reads: “Don’t try.”
See, despite the book sales and the fame, Bukowski was a loser. He knew it. And his success
stemmed not from some determination to be a winner, but from the fact that he knew he was a loser,
accepted it, and then wrote honestly about it. He never tried to be anything other than what he was.
The genius in Bukowski’s work was not in overcoming unbelievable odds or developing himself into
a shining literary light. It was the opposite. It was his simple ability to be completely, unflinchingly
honest with himself—especially the worst parts of himself—and to share his failings without
hesitation or doubt.
This is the real story of Bukowski’s success: his comfort with himself as a failure. Bukowski
didn’t give a fuck about success. Even after his fame, he still showed up to poetry readings hammered
and verbally abused people in his audience. He still exposed himself in public and tried to sleep with
every woman he could find. Fame and success didn’t make him a better person. Nor was it by
becoming a better person that he became famous and successful.
Self-improvement and success often occur together. But that doesn’t necessarily mean they’re the
same thing.
Our culture today is obsessively focused on unrealistically positive expectations: Be happier. Be
healthier. Be the best, better than the rest. Be smarter, faster, richer, sexier, more popular, more
productive, more envied, and more admired. Be perfect and amazing and crap out twelve-karat-gold
nuggets before breakfast each morning while kissing your selfie-ready spouse and two and a half kids
goodbye. Then fly your helicopter to your wonderfully fulfilling job, where you spend your days
doing incredibly meaningful work that’s likely to save the planet one day.
But when you stop and really think about it, conventional life advice—all the positive and happy
self-help stuff we hear all the time—is actually fixating on what you lack. It lasers in on what you
perceive your personal shortcomings and failures to already be, and then emphasizes them for you.
You learn about the best ways to make money because you feel you don’t have enough money already.
You stand in front of the mirror and repeat affirmations saying that you’re beautiful because you feel
as though you’re not beautiful already. You follow dating and relationship advice because you feel
that you’re unlovable already. You try goofy visualization exercises about being more successful
because you feel as though you aren’t successful enough already.
Ironically, this fixation on the positive—on what’s better, what’s superior—only serves to remind
us over and over again of what we are not, of what we lack, of what we should have been but failed
to be. After all, no truly happy person feels the need to stand in front of a mirror and recite that she’s
happy. She just is.
There’s a saying in Texas: “The smallest dog barks the loudest.” A confident man doesn’t feel a
need to prove that he’s confident. A rich woman doesn’t feel a need to convince anybody that she’s
rich. Either you are or you are not. And if you’re dreaming of something all the time, then you’re
reinforcing the same unconscious reality over and over: that you are not that.
Everyone and their TV commercial wants you to believe that the key to a good life is a nicer job,
or a more rugged car, or a prettier girlfriend, or a hot tub with an inflatable pool for the kids. The
world is constantly telling you that the path to a better life is more, more, more—buy more, own
more, make more, fuck more, be more. You are constantly bombarded with messages to give a fuck
about everything, all the time. Give a fuck about a new TV. Give a fuck about having a better vacation
than your coworkers. Give a fuck about buying that new lawn ornament. Give a fuck about having the
right kind of selfie stick.
Why? My guess: because giving a fuck about more stuff is good for business.
And while there’s nothing wrong with good business, the problem is that giving too many fucks is
bad for your mental health. It causes you to become overly attached to the superficial and fake, to
dedicate your life to chasing a mirage of happiness and satisfaction. The key to a good life is not
giving a fuck about more; it’s giving a fuck about less, giving a fuck about only what is true and
immediate and important.
The Feedback Loop from Hell
There’s an insidious quirk to your brain that, if you let it, can drive you absolutely batty. Tell me if
this sounds familiar to you:
You get anxious about confronting somebody in your life. That anxiety cripples you and you start
wondering why you’re so anxious. Now you’re becoming anxious about being anxious. Oh no!
Doubly anxious! Now you’re anxious about your anxiety, which is causing more anxiety. Quick,
where’s the whiskey?
Or let’s say you have an anger problem. You get pissed off at the stupidest, most inane stuff, and
you have no idea why. And the fact that you get pissed off so easily starts to piss you off even more.
And then, in your petty rage, you realize that being angry all the time makes you a shallow and mean
person, and you hate this; you hate it so much that you get angry at yourself. Now look at you: you’re
angry at yourself getting angry about being angry. Fuck you, wall. Here, have a fist.
Or you’re so worried about doing the right thing all the time that you become worried about how
much you’re worrying. Or you feel so guilty for every mistake you make that you begin to feel guilty
about how guilty you’re feeling. Or you get sad and alone so often that it makes you feel even more
sad and alone just thinking about it.
Welcome to the Feedback Loop from Hell. Chances are you’ve engaged in it more than a few
times. Maybe you’re engaging in it right now: “God, I do the Feedback Loop all the time—I’m such a
loser for doing it. I should stop. Oh my God, I feel like such a loser for calling myself a loser. I
should stop calling myself a loser. Ah, fuck! I’m doing it again! See? I’m a loser! Argh!”
Calm down, amigo. Believe it or not, this is part of the beauty of being human. Very few animals
on earth have the ability to think cogent thoughts to begin with, but we humans have the luxury of
being able to have thoughts about our thoughts. So I can think about watching Miley Cyrus videos on
YouTube, and then immediately think about what a sicko I am for wanting to watch Miley Cyrus
videos on YouTube. Ah, the miracle of consciousness!
Now here’s the problem: Our society today, through the wonders of consumer culture and heylook-my-life-is-cooler-than-yours
social media, has bred a whole generation of people who believe
that having these negative experiences—anxiety, fear, guilt, etc.—is totally not okay. I mean, if you
look at your Facebook feed, everybody there is having a fucking grand old time. Look, eight people
got married this week! And some sixteen-year-old on TV got a Ferrari for her birthday. And another
kid just made two billion dollars inventing an app that automatically delivers you more toilet paper
when you run out.
Meanwhile, you’re stuck at home flossing your cat. And you can’t help but think your life sucks
even more than you thought.
The Feedback Loop from Hell has become a borderline epidemic, making many of us overly
stressed, overly neurotic, and overly self-loathing.
Back in Grandpa’s day, he would feel like shit and think to himself, “Gee whiz, I sure do feel like
a cow turd today. But hey, I guess that’s just life. Back to shoveling hay.”
But now? Now if you feel like shit for even five minutes, you’re bombarded with 350 images of
people totally happy and having amazing fucking lives, and it’s impossible to not feel like there’s
something wrong with you.
It’s this last part that gets us into trouble. We feel bad about feeling bad. We feel guilty for feeling
guilty. We get angry about getting angry. We get anxious about feeling anxious. What is wrong with
me?
This is why not giving a fuck is so key. This is why it’s going to save the world. And it’s going to
save it by accepting that the world is totally fucked and that’s all right, because it’s always been that
way, and always will be.
By not giving a fuck that you feel bad, you short-circuit the Feedback Loop from Hell; you say to
yourself, “I feel like shit, but who gives a fuck?” And then, as if sprinkled by magic fuck-giving fairy
dust, you stop hating yourself for feeling so bad.
George Orwell said that to see what’s in front of one’s nose requires a constant struggle. Well, the
solution to our stress and anxiety is right there in front of our noses, and we’re too busy watching porn
and advertisements for ab machines that don’t work, wondering why we’re not banging a hot blonde
with a rocking six-pack, to notice.
We joke online about “first-world problems,” but we really have become victims of our own
success. Stress-related health issues, anxiety disorders, and cases of depression have skyrocketed
over the past thirty years, despite the fact that everyone has a flat-screen TV and can have their
groceries delivered. Our crisis is no longer material; it’s existential, it’s spiritual. We have so much
fucking stuff and so many opportunities that we don’t even know what to give a fuck about anymore.
Because there’s an infinite amount of things we can now see or know, there are also an infinite
number of ways we can discover that we don’t measure up, that we’re not good enough, that things
aren’t as great as they could be. And this rips us apart inside.
Because here’s the thing that’s wrong with all of the “How to Be Happy” shit that’s been shared
eight million times on Facebook in the past few years—here’s what nobody realizes about all of this
crap:
The desire for more positive experience is itself a negative experience. And,
paradoxically, the acceptance of one’s negative experience is itself a positive
experience.
This is a total mind-fuck. So I’ll give you a minute to unpretzel your brain and maybe read that
again: Wanting positive experience is a negative experience; accepting negative experience is a
positive experience. It’s what the philosopher Alan Watts used to refer to as “the backwards law”—
the idea that the more you pursue feeling better all the time, the less satisfied you become, as pursuing
something only reinforces the fact that you lack it in the first place. The more you desperately want to
be rich, the more poor and unworthy you feel, regardless of how much money you actually make. The
more you desperately want to be sexy and desired, the uglier you come to see yourself, regardless of
your actual physical appearance. The more you desperately want to be happy and loved, the lonelier
and more afraid you become, regardless of those who surround you. The more you want to be
spiritually enlightened, the more self-centered and shallow you become in trying to get there.
It’s like this one time I tripped on acid and it felt like the more I walked toward a house, the
farther away the house got from me. And yes, I just used my LSD hallucinations to make a
philosophical point about happiness. No fucks given.
As the existential philosopher Albert Camus said (and I’m pretty sure he wasn’t on LSD at the
time): “You will never be happy if you continue to search for what happiness consists of. You will
never live if you are looking for the meaning of life.”
Or put more simply:
Don’t try.
Now, I know what you’re saying: “Mark, this is making my nipples all hard, but what about the
Camaro I’ve been saving up for? What about the beach body I’ve been starving myself for? After all,
I paid a lot of money for that ab machine! What about the big house on the lake I’ve been dreaming of?
If I stop giving a fuck about those things—well, then I’ll never achieve anything. I don’t want that to
happen, do I?”
So glad you asked.
Ever notice that sometimes when you care less about something, you do better at it? Notice how
it’s often the person who is the least invested in the success of something that actually ends up
achieving it? Notice how sometimes when you stop giving a fuck, everything seems to fall into place?
What’s with that?
What’s interesting about the backwards law is that it’s called “backwards” for a reason: not
giving a fuck works in reverse. If pursuing the positive is a negative, then pursuing the negative
generates the positive. The pain you pursue in the gym results in better all-around health and energy.
The failures in business are what lead to a better understanding of what’s necessary to be successful.
Being open with your insecurities paradoxically makes you more confident and charismatic around
others. The pain of honest confrontation is what generates the greatest trust and respect in your
relationships. Suffering through your fears and anxieties is what allows you to build courage and
perseverance.
Seriously, I could keep going, but you get the point. Everything worthwhile in life is won through
surmounting the associated negative experience. Any attempt to escape the negative, to avoid it or
quash it or silence it, only backfires. The avoidance of suffering is a form of suffering. The avoidance
of struggle is a struggle. The denial of failure is a failure. Hiding what is shameful is itself a form of
shame.
Pain is an inextricable thread in the fabric of life, and to tear it out is not only impossible, but
destructive: attempting to tear it out unravels everything else with it. To try to avoid pain is to give
too many fucks about pain. In contrast, if you’re able to not give a fuck about the pain, you become
unstoppable.
In my life, I have given a fuck about many things. I have also not given a fuck about many things.
And like the road not taken, it was the fucks not given that made all the difference.
Chances are you know somebody in your life who, at one time or another, did not give a fuck and
then went on to accomplish amazing feats. Perhaps there was a time in your own life when you simply
did not give a fuck and excelled to some extraordinary height. For myself, quitting my day job in
finance after only six weeks to start an Internet business ranks pretty high up there in my own “didn’t
give a fuck” hall of fame. Same with deciding to sell most of my possessions and move to South
America. Fucks given? None. Just went and did it.
These moments of non-fuckery are the moments that most define our lives. The major switch in
careers; the spontaneous choice to drop out of college and join a rock band; the decision to finally
dump that deadbeat boyfriend whom you caught wearing your pantyhose a few too many times.
To not give a fuck is to stare down life’s most terrifying and difficult challenges and still take
action.
While not giving a fuck may seem simple on the surface, it’s a whole new bag of burritos under
the hood. I don’t even know what that sentence means, but I don’t give a fuck. A bag of burritos
sounds awesome, so let’s just go with it.
Most of us struggle throughout our lives by giving too many fucks in situations where fucks do not
deserve to be given. We give too many fucks about the rude gas station attendant who gave us our
change in nickels. We give too many fucks when a show we liked was canceled on TV. We give too
many fucks when our coworkers don’t bother asking us about our awesome weekend.
Meanwhile, our credit cards are maxed out, our dog hates us, and Junior is snorting meth in the
bathroom, yet we’re getting pissed off about nickels and Everybody Loves Raymond.
Look, this is how it works. You’re going to die one day. I know that’s kind of obvious, but I just
wanted to remind you in case you’d forgotten. You and everyone you know are going to be dead soon.
And in the short amount of time between here and there, you have a limited amount of fucks to give.
Very few, in fact. And if you go around giving a fuck about everything and everyone without conscious
thought or choice—well, then you’re going to get fucked.
There is a subtle art to not giving a fuck. And though the concept may sound ridiculous and I may
sound like an asshole, what I’m talking about here is essentially learning how to focus and prioritize
your thoughts effectively—how to pick and choose what matters to you and what does not matter to
you based on finely honed personal values. This is incredibly difficult. It takes a lifetime of practice
and discipline to achieve. And you will regularly fail. But it is perhaps the most worthy struggle one
can undertake in one’s life. It is perhaps the only struggle in one’s life.
Because when you give too many fucks—when you give a fuck about everyone and everything—
you will feel that you’re perpetually entitled to be comfortable and happy at all times, that everything
is supposed to be just exactly the fucking way you want it to be. This is a sickness. And it will eat you
alive. You will see every adversity as an injustice, every challenge as a failure, every inconvenience
as a personal slight, every disagreement as a betrayal. You will be confined to your own petty, skullsized
hell, burning with entitlement and bluster, running circles around your very own personal
Feedback Loop from Hell, in constant motion yet arriving nowhere.
The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck
When most people envision giving no fucks whatsoever, they imagine a kind of serene indifference to
everything, a calm that weathers all storms. They imagine and aspire to be a person who is shaken by
nothing and caves in to no one.
There’s a name for a person who finds no emotion or meaning in anything: a psychopath. Why you
would want to emulate a psychopath, I have no fucking clue.
So what does not giving a fuck mean? Let’s look at three “subtleties” that should help clarify the
matter.
Subtlety #1: Not giving a fuck does not mean being indifferent; it means being comfortable
with being different.
Let’s be clear. There’s absolutely nothing admirable or confident about indifference. People who
are indifferent are lame and scared. They’re couch potatoes and Internet trolls. In fact, indifferent
people often attempt to be indifferent because in reality they give way too many fucks. They give a
fuck about what everyone thinks of their hair, so they never bother washing or combing it. They give a
fuck about what everyone thinks of their ideas, so they hide behind sarcasm and self-righteous snark.
They’re afraid to let anyone get close to them, so they imagine themselves as some special, unique
snowflake who has problems that nobody else would ever understand.
Indifferent people are afraid of the world and the repercussions of their own choices. That’s why
they don’t make any meaningful choices. They hide in a gray, emotionless pit of their own making,
self-absorbed and self-pitying, perpetually distracting themselves from this unfortunate thing
demanding their time and energy called life.
Because here’s a sneaky truth about life. There’s no such thing as not giving a fuck. You must give
a fuck about something. It’s part of our biology to always care about something and therefore to
always give a fuck.
The question, then, is, What do we give a fuck about? What are we choosing to give a fuck about?
And how can we not give a fuck about what ultimately does not matter?
My mother was recently screwed out of a large chunk of money by a close friend of hers. Had I
been indifferent, I would have shrugged my shoulders, sipped my mocha, and downloaded another
season of The Wire. Sorry, Mom.
But instead, I was indignant. I was pissed off. I said, “No, screw that, Mom. We’re going to
lawyer the fuck up and go after this asshole. Why? Because I don’t give a fuck. I will ruin this guy’s
life if I have to.”
This illustrates the first subtlety of not giving a fuck. When we say, “Damn, watch out, Mark
Manson just don’t give a fuck,” we don’t mean that Mark Manson doesn’t care about anything; on the
contrary, we mean that Mark Manson doesn’t care about adversity in the face of his goals, he doesn’t
care about pissing some people off to do what he feels is right or important or noble. We mean that
Mark Manson is the type of guy who would write about himself in third person just because he
thought it was the right thing to do. He just doesn’t give a fuck.
This is what is so admirable. No, not me, dumbass—the overcoming adversity stuff, the
willingness to be different, an outcast, a pariah, all for the sake of one’s own values. The willingness
to stare failure in the face and shove your middle finger back at it. The people who don’t give a fuck
about adversity or failure or embarrassing themselves or shitting the bed a few times. The people
who just laugh and then do what they believe in anyway. Because they know it’s right. They know it’s
more important than they are, more important than their own feelings and their own pride and their
own ego. They say, “Fuck it,” not to everything in life, but rather to everything unimportant in life.
They reserve their fucks for what truly matters. Friends. Family. Purpose. Burritos. And an occasional
lawsuit or two. And because of that, because they reserve their fucks for only the big things that
matter, people give a fuck about them in return.
Because here’s another sneaky little truth about life. You can’t be an important and life-changing
presence for some people without also being a joke and an embarrassment to others. You just can’t.
Because there’s no such thing as a lack of adversity. It doesn’t exist. The old saying goes that no
matter where you go, there you are. Well, the same is true for adversity and failure. No matter where
you go, there’s a five-hundred-pound load of shit waiting for you. And that’s perfectly fine. The point
isn’t to get away from the shit. The point is to find the shit you enjoy dealing with.
Subtlety #2: To not give a fuck about adversity, you must first give a fuck about something
more important than adversity.
Imagine you’re at a grocery store, and you watch an elderly lady scream at the cashier, berating
him for not accepting her thirty-cent coupon. Why does this lady give a fuck? It’s just thirty cents.
I’ll tell you why: That lady probably doesn’t have anything better to do with her days than to sit at
home cutting out coupons. She’s old and lonely. Her kids are dickheads and never visit. She hasn’t
had sex in over thirty years. She can’t fart without extreme lower-back pain. Her pension is on its last
legs, and she’s probably going to die in a diaper thinking she’s in Candy Land.
So she snips coupons. That’s all she’s got. It’s her and her damn coupons. It’s all she can give a
fuck about because there is nothing else to give a fuck about. And so when that pimply-faced
seventeen-year-old cashier refuses to accept one of them, when he defends his cash register’s purity
the way knights used to defend maidens’ virginity, you can bet Granny is going to erupt. Eighty years
of fucks will rain down all at once, like a fiery hailstorm of “Back in my day” and “People used to
show more respect” stories.
The problem with people who hand out fucks like ice cream at a goddamn summer camp is that
they don’t have anything more fuck-worthy to dedicate their fucks to.
If you find yourself consistently giving too many fucks about trivial shit that bothers you—your exboyfriend’s
new Facebook picture, how quickly the batteries die in the TV remote, missing out on yet
another two-for-one sale on hand sanitizer—chances are you don’t have much going on in your life to
give a legitimate fuck about. And that’s your real problem. Not the hand sanitizer. Not the TV remote.
I once heard an artist say that when a person has no problems, the mind automatically finds a way
to invent some. I think what most people—especially educated, pampered middle-class white people
—consider “life problems” are really just side effects of not having anything more important to worry
about.
It then follows that finding something important and meaningful in your life is perhaps the most
productive use of your time and energy. Because if you don’t find that meaningful something, your
fucks will be given to meaningless and frivolous causes.
Subtlety #3: Whether you realize it or not, you are always choosing what to give a fuck
about.
People aren’t just born not giving a fuck. In fact, we’re born giving way too many fucks. Ever
watch a kid cry his eyes out because his hat is the wrong shade of blue? Exactly. Fuck that kid.
When we’re young, everything is new and exciting, and everything seems to matter so much.
Therefore, we give tons of fucks. We give a fuck about everything and everyone—about what people
are saying about us, about whether that cute boy/girl called us back or not, about whether our socks
match or not, or what color our birthday balloon is.
As we get older, with the benefit of experience (and having seen so much time slip by), we begin
to notice that most of these sorts of things have little lasting impact on our lives. Those people whose
opinions we cared about so much before are no longer present in our lives. Rejections that were
painful in the moment have actually worked out for the best. We realize how little attention people
pay to the superficial details about us, and we choose not to obsess so much over them.
Essentially, we become more selective about the fucks we’re willing to give. This is something
called maturity. It’s nice; you should try it sometime. Maturity is what happens when one learns to
only give a fuck about what’s truly fuckworthy. As Bunk Moreland said to his partner Detective
McNulty in The Wire (which, fuck you, I still downloaded): “That’s what you get for giving a fuck
when it wasn’t your turn to give a fuck.”
Then, as we grow older and enter middle age, something else begins to change. Our energy level
drops. Our identity solidifies. We know who we are and we accept ourselves, including some of the
parts we aren’t thrilled about.
And, in a strange way, this is liberating. We no longer need to give a fuck about everything. Life is
just what it is. We accept it, warts and all. We realize that we’re never going to cure cancer or go to
the moon or feel Jennifer Aniston’s tits. And that’s okay. Life goes on. We now reserve our everdwindling
fucks for the most truly fuck-worthy parts of our lives: our families, our best friends, our
golf swing. And, to our astonishment, this is enough. This simplification actually makes us really
fucking happy on a consistent basis. And we start to think, Maybe that crazy alcoholic Bukowski was
onto something. Don’t try.
So Mark, What the Fuck Is the Point of This Book Anyway?
This book will help you think a little bit more clearly about what you’re choosing to find important in
life and what you’re choosing to find unimportant.
I believe that today we’re facing a psychological epidemic, one in which people no longer realize
it’s okay for things to suck sometimes. I know that sounds intellectually lazy on the surface, but I
promise you, it’s a life/death sort of issue.
Because when we believe that it’s not okay for things to suck sometimes, then we unconsciously
start blaming ourselves. We start to feel as though something is inherently wrong with us, which
drives us to all sorts of overcompensation, like buying forty pairs of shoes or downing Xanax with a
vodka chaser on a Tuesday night or shooting up a school bus full of kids.
This belief that it’s not okay to be inadequate sometimes is the source of the growing Feedback
Loop from Hell that is coming to dominate our culture.
The idea of not giving a fuck is a simple way of reorienting our expectations for life and choosing
what is important and what is not. Developing this ability leads to something I like to think of as a
kind of “practical enlightenment.”
No, not that airy-fairy, eternal bliss, end-of-all-suffering, bullshitty kind of enlightenment. On the
contrary, I see practical enlightenment as becoming comfortable with the idea that some suffering is
always inevitable—that no matter what you do, life is comprised of failures, loss, regrets, and even
death. Because once you become comfortable with all the shit that life throws at you (and it will
throw a lot of shit, trust me), you become invincible in a sort of low-level spiritual way. After all, the
only way to overcome pain is to first learn how to bear it.
This book doesn’t give a fuck about alleviating your problems or your pain. And that is precisely
why you will know it’s being honest. This book is not some guide to greatness—it couldn’t be,
because greatness is merely an illusion in our minds, a made-up destination that we obligate
ourselves to pursue, our own psychological Atlantis.
Instead, this book will turn your pain into a tool, your trauma into power, and your problems into
slightly better problems. That is real progress. Think of it as a guide to suffering and how to do it
better, more meaningfully, with more compassion and more humility. It’s a book about moving lightly
despite your heavy burdens, resting easier with your greatest fears, laughing at your tears as you cry
them.
This book will not teach you how to gain or achieve, but rather how to lose and let go. It will
teach you to take inventory of your life and scrub out all but the most important items. It will teach you
to close your eyes and trust that you can fall backwards and still be okay. It will teach you to give
fewer fucks. It will teach you to not try.
CHAPTER 2
Happiness Is a Problem
About twenty-five hundred years ago, in the Himalayan foothills of present-day Nepal, there lived in
a great palace a king who was going to have a son. For this son the king had a particularly grand idea:
he would make the child’s life perfect. The child would never know a moment of suffering—every
need, every desire, would be accounted for at all times.
The king built high walls around the palace that prevented the prince from knowing the outside
world. He spoiled the child, lavishing him with food and gifts, surrounding him with servants who
catered to his every whim. And just as planned, the child grew up ignorant of the routine cruelties of
human existence.
All of the prince’s childhood went on like this. But despite the endless luxury and opulence, the
prince became kind of a pissed-off young man. Soon, every experience felt empty and valueless. The
problem was that no matter what his father gave him, it never seemed enough, never meant anything.
So late one night, the prince snuck out of the palace to see what was beyond its walls. He had a
servant drive him through the local village, and what he saw horrified him.
For the first time in his life, the prince saw human suffering. He saw sick people, old people,
homeless people, people in pain, even people dying.
The prince returned to the palace and found himself in a sort of existential crisis. Not knowing
how to process what he’d seen, he got all emo about everything and complained a lot. And, as is so
typical of young men, the prince ended up blaming his father for the very things his father had tried to
do for him. It was the riches, the prince thought, that had made him so miserable, that had made life
seem so meaningless. He decided to run away.
But the prince was more like his father than he knew. He had grand ideas too. He wouldn’t just
run away; he would give up his royalty, his family, and all of his possessions and live in the streets,
sleeping in dirt like an animal. There he would starve himself, torture himself, and beg for scraps of
food from strangers for the rest of his life.
The next night, the prince snuck out of the palace again, this time never to return. For years he
lived as a bum, a discarded and forgotten remnant of society, the dog shit caked to the bottom of the
social totem pole. And as planned, the prince suffered greatly. He suffered through disease, hunger,
pain, loneliness, and decay. He confronted the brink of death itself, often limited to eating a single nut
each day.
A few years went by. Then a few more. And then . . . nothing happened. The prince began to
notice that this life of suffering wasn’t all that it was cracked up to be. It wasn’t bringing him the
insight he had desired. It wasn’t revealing any deeper mystery of the world or its ultimate purpose.
In fact, the prince came to know what the rest of us have always kind of known: that suffering
totally sucks. And it’s not necessarily that meaningful either. As with being rich, there is no value in
suffering when it’s done without purpose. And soon the prince came to the conclusion that his grand
idea, like his father’s, was in fact a fucking terrible idea and he should probably go do something else
instead.
Totally confused, the prince cleaned himself up and went and found a big tree near a river. He
decided that he would sit under that tree and not get up until he came up with another grand idea.
As the legend goes, the confused prince sat under that tree for forty-nine days. We won’t delve
into the biological viability of sitting in the same spot for forty-nine days, but let’s just say that in that
time the prince came to a number of profound realizations.
One of those realizations was this: that life itself is a form of suffering. The rich suffer because of
their riches. The poor suffer because of their poverty. People without a family suffer because they
have no family. People with a family suffer because of their family. People who pursue worldly
pleasures suffer because of their worldly pleasures. People who abstain from worldly pleasures
suffer because of their abstention.
This isn’t to say that all suffering is equal. Some suffering is certainly more painful than other
suffering. But we all must suffer nonetheless.
Years later, the prince would build his own philosophy and share it with the world, and this
would be its first and central tenet: that pain and loss are inevitable and we should let go of trying to
resist them. The prince would later become known as the Buddha. And in case you haven’t heard of
him, he was kind of a big deal.
There is a premise that underlies a lot of our assumptions and beliefs. The premise is that
happiness is algorithmic, that it can be worked for and earned and achieved as if it were getting
accepted to law school or building a really complicated Lego set. If I achieve X, then I can be happy.
If I look like Y, then I can be happy. If I can be with a person like Z, then I can be happy.
This premise, though, is the problem. Happiness is not a solvable equation. Dissatisfaction and
unease are inherent parts of human nature and, as we’ll see, necessary components to creating
consistent happiness. The Buddha argued this from a theological and philosophical perspective. I will
make the same argument in this chapter, but I will make it from a biological perspective, and with
pandas.
The Misadventures of Disappointment Panda
If I could invent a superhero, I would invent one called Disappointment Panda. He’d wear a cheesy
eye mask and a shirt (with a giant capital T on it) that was way too small for his big panda belly, and
his superpower would be to tell people harsh truths about themselves that they needed to hear but
didn’t want to accept.
He would go door-to-door like a Bible salesman and ring doorbells and say things like, “Sure,
making a lot of money makes you feel good, but it won’t make your kids love you,” or “If you have to
ask yourself if you trust your wife, then you probably don’t,” or “What you consider ‘friendship’ is
really just your constant attempts to impress people.” Then he’d tell the homeowner to have a nice
day and saunter on down to the next house.
It would be awesome. And sick. And sad. And uplifting. And necessary. After all, the greatest
truths in life are usually the most unpleasant to hear.
Disappointment Panda would be the hero that none of us would want but all of us would need.
He’d be the proverbial vegetables to our mental diet of junk food. He’d make our lives better despite
making us feel worse. He’d make us stronger by tearing us down, brighten our future by showing us
the darkness. Listening to him would be like watching a movie where the hero dies in the end: you
love it even more despite making you feel horrible, because it feels real.
So while we’re here, allow me to put on my Disappointment Panda mask and drop another
unpleasant truth on you:
We suffer for the simple reason that suffering is biologically useful. It is nature’s preferred agent
for inspiring change. We have evolved to always live with a certain degree of dissatisfaction and
insecurity, because it’s the mildly dissatisfied and insecure creature that’s going to do the most work
to innovate and survive. We are wired to become dissatisfied with whatever we have and satisfied by
only what we do not have. This constant dissatisfaction has kept our species fighting and striving,
building and conquering. So no—our own pain and misery aren’t a bug of human evolution; they’re a
feature.
Pain, in all of its forms, is our body’s most effective means of spurring action. Take something as
simple as stubbing your toe. If you’re like me, when you stub your toe you scream enough four-letter
words to make Pope Francis cry. You also probably blame some poor inanimate object for your
suffering. “Stupid table,” you say. Or maybe you even go so far as to question your entire interior
design philosophy based on your throbbing foot: “What kind of idiot puts a table there anyway?
Seriously?”
But I digress. That horrible stubbed-toe-induced pain, the one you and I and the pope hate so
much, exists for an important reason. Physical pain is a product of our nervous system, a feedback
mechanism to give us a sense of our own physical proportions—where we can and cannot move and
what we can and cannot touch. When we exceed those limits, our nervous system duly punishes us to
make sure that we pay attention and never do it again.
And this pain, as much as we hate it, is useful. Pain is what teaches us what to pay attention to
when we’re young or careless. It helps show us what’s good for us versus what’s bad for us. It helps
us understand and adhere to our own limitations. It teaches us to not fuck around near hot stoves or
stick metal objects into electrical sockets. Therefore, it’s not always beneficial to avoid pain and
seek pleasure, since pain can, at times, be life-or-death important to our well-being.
But pain is not merely physical. As anyone who has had to sit through the first Star Wars prequel
can tell you, we humans are capable of experiencing acute psychological pain as well. In fact,
research has found that our brains don’t register much difference between physical pain and
psychological pain. So when I tell you that my first girlfriend cheating on me and leaving me felt like
having an ice pick slowly inserted into the center of my heart, that’s because, well, it hurt so much I
might as well have had an ice pick slowly inserted into the center of my heart.
Like physical pain, our psychological pain is an indication of something out of equilibrium, some
limitation that has been exceeded. And like our physical pain, our psychological pain is not
necessarily always bad or even undesirable. In some cases, experiencing emotional or psychological
pain can be healthy or necessary. Just like stubbing our toe teaches us to walk into fewer tables, the
emotional pain of rejection or failure teaches us how to avoid making the same mistakes in the future.
And this is what’s so dangerous about a society that coddles itself more and more from the
inevitable discomforts of life: we lose the benefits of experiencing healthy doses of pain, a loss that
disconnects us from the reality of the world around us.
You may salivate at the thought of a problem-free life full of everlasting happiness and eternal
compassion, but back here on earth the problems never cease. Seriously, problems don’t end.
Disappointment Panda just dropped by. We had margaritas, and he told me all about it: problems
never fucking go away, he said—they just improve. Warren Buffett’s got money problems; the drunk
hobo down at Kwik-E Mart’s got money problems. Buffett’s just got better money problems than the
hobo. All of life is like this.
“Life is essentially an endless series of problems, Mark,” the panda told me. He sipped his drink
and adjusted the little pink umbrella. “The solution to one problem is merely the creation of the next
one.”
A moment passed, and then I wondered where the fuck the talking panda came from. And while
we’re at it, who made these margaritas?
“Don’t hope for a life without problems,” the panda said. “There’s no such thing. Instead, hope
for a life full of good problems.”
And with that, he set his glass down, adjusted his sombrero, and sauntered off into the sunset.
Happiness Comes from Solving Problems
Problems are a constant in life. When you solve your health problem by buying a gym membership,
you create new problems, like having to get up early to get to the gym on time, sweating like a methhead
for thirty minutes on an elliptical, and then getting showered and changed for work so you don’t
stink up the whole office. When you solve your problem of not spending enough time with your
partner by designating Wednesday night “date night,” you generate new problems, such as figuring out
what to do every Wednesday that you both won’t hate, making sure you have enough money for nice
dinners, rediscovering the chemistry and spark you two feel you’ve lost, and unraveling the logistics
of fucking in a small bathtub filled with too many bubbles.
Problems never stop; they merely get exchanged and/or upgraded.
Happiness comes from solving problems. The keyword here is “solving.” If you’re avoiding your
problems or feel like you don’t have any problems, then you’re going to make yourself miserable. If
you feel like you have problems that you can’t solve, you will likewise make yourself miserable. The
secret sauce is in the solving of the problems, not in not having problems in the first place.
To be happy we need something to solve. Happiness is therefore a form of action; it’s an activity,
not something that is passively bestowed upon you, not something that you magically discover in a
top-ten article on the Huffington Post or from any specific guru or teacher. It doesn’t magically appear
when you finally make enough money to add on that extra room to the house. You don’t find it waiting
for you in a place, an idea, a job—or even a book, for that matter.
Happiness is a constant work-in-progress, because solving problems is a constant work-inprogress—the
solutions to today’s problems will lay the foundation for tomorrow’s problems, and so
on. True happiness occurs only when you find the problems you enjoy having and enjoy solving.
Sometimes those problems are simple: eating good food, traveling to some new place, winning at
the new video game you just bought. Other times those problems are abstract and complicated: fixing
your relationship with your mother, finding a career you can feel good about, developing better
friendships.
Whatever your problems are, the concept is the same: solve problems; be happy. Unfortunately,
for many people, life doesn’t feel that simple. That’s because they fuck things up in at least one of two
ways:
1. Denial. Some people deny that their problems exist in the first place. And because they deny
reality, they must constantly delude or distract themselves from reality. This may make them feel
good in the short term, but it leads to a life of insecurity, neuroticism, and emotional repression.
2. Victim Mentality. Some choose to believe that there is nothing they can do to solve their
problems, even when they in fact could. Victims seek to blame others for their problems or blame
outside circumstances. This may make them feel better in the short term, but it leads to a life of
anger, helplessness, and despair.
People deny and blame others for their problems for the simple reason that it’s easy and feels
good, while solving problems is hard and often feels bad. Forms of blame and denial give us a quick
high. They are a way to temporarily escape our problems, and that escape can provide us a quick rush
that makes us feel better.
Highs come in many forms. Whether it’s a substance like alcohol, the moral righteousness that
comes from blaming others, or the thrill of some new risky adventure, highs are shallow and
unproductive ways to go about one’s life. Much of the self-help world is predicated on peddling highs
to people rather than solving legitimate problems. Many self-help gurus teach you new forms of
denial and pump you up with exercises that feel good in the short term, while ignoring the underlying
issue. Remember, nobody who is actually happy has to stand in front of a mirror and tell himself that
he’s happy.
Highs also generate addiction. The more you rely on them to feel better about your underlying
problems, the more you will seek them out. In this sense, almost anything can become addictive,
depending on the motivation behind using it. We all have our chosen methods to numb the pain of our
problems, and in moderate doses there is nothing wrong with this. But the longer we avoid and the
longer we numb, the more painful it will be when we finally do confront our issues.
Emotions Are Overrated
Emotions evolved for one specific purpose: to help us live and reproduce a little bit better. That’s it.
They’re feedback mechanisms telling us that something is either likely right or likely wrong for us—
nothing more, nothing less.
Much as the pain of touching a hot stove teaches you not to touch it again, the sadness of being
alone teaches you not to do the things that made you feel so alone again. Emotions are simply
biological signals designed to nudge you in the direction of beneficial change.
Look, I don’t mean to make light of your midlife crisis or the fact that your drunk dad stole your
bike when you were eight years old and you still haven’t gotten over it, but when it comes down to it,
if you feel crappy it’s because your brain is telling you that there’s a problem that’s unaddressed or
unresolved. In other words, negative emotions are a call to action. When you feel them, it’s because
you’re supposed to do something. Positive emotions, on the other hand, are rewards for taking the
proper action. When you feel them, life seems simple and there is nothing else to do but enjoy it.
Then, like everything else, the positive emotions go away, because more problems inevitably emerge.
Emotions are part of the equation of our lives, but not the entire equation. Just because something
feels good doesn’t mean it is good. Just because something feels bad doesn’t mean it is bad. Emotions
are merely signposts, suggestions that our neurobiology gives us, not commandments. Therefore, we
shouldn’t always trust our own emotions. In fact, I believe we should make a habit of questioning
them.
Many people are taught to repress their emotions for various personal, social, or cultural reasons
—particularly negative emotions. Sadly, to deny one’s negative emotions is to deny many of the
feedback mechanisms that help a person solve problems. As a result, many of these repressed
individuals struggle to deal with problems throughout their lives. And if they can’t solve problems,
then they can’t be happy. Remember, pain serves a purpose.
But then there are those people who overidentify with their emotions. Everything is justified for
no other reason than they felt it. “Oh, I broke your windshield, but I was really mad; I couldn’t help
it.” Or “I dropped out of school and moved to Alaska just because it felt right.” Decision-making
based on emotional intuition, without the aid of reason to keep it in line, pretty much always sucks.
You know who bases their entire lives on their emotions? Three-year-old kids. And dogs. You know
what else three-year-olds and dogs do? Shit on the carpet.
An obsession and overinvestment in emotion fails us for the simple reason that emotions never
last. Whatever makes us happy today will no longer make us happy tomorrow, because our biology
always needs something more. A fixation on happiness inevitably amounts to a never-ending pursuit
of “something else”—a new house, a new relationship, another child, another pay raise. And despite
all of our sweat and strain, we end up feeling eerily similar to how we started: inadequate.
Psychologists sometimes refer to this concept as the “hedonic treadmill”: the idea that we’re
always working hard to change our life situation, but we actually never feel very different.
This is why our problems are recursive and unavoidable. The person you marry is the person you
fight with. The house you buy is the house you repair. The dream job you take is the job you stress
over. Everything comes with an inherent sacrifice—whatever makes us feel good will also inevitably
make us feel bad. What we gain is also what we lose. What creates our positive experiences will
define our negative experiences.
This is a difficult pill to swallow. We like the idea that there’s some form of ultimate happiness
that can be attained. We like the idea that we can alleviate all of our suffering permanently. We like
the idea that we can feel fulfilled and satisfied with our lives forever.
But we cannot.
Choose Your Struggle
If I ask you, “What do you want out of life?” and you say something like, “I want to be happy and have
a great family and a job I like,” your response is so common and expected that it doesn’t really mean
anything.
Everybody enjoys what feels good. Everyone wants to live a carefree, happy, and easy life, to fall
in love and have amazing sex and relationships, to look perfect and make money and be popular and
well-respected and admired and a total baller to the point that people part like the Red Sea when they
walk into the room.
Everybody wants that. It’s easy to want that.
A more interesting question, a question that most people never consider, is, “What pain do you
want in your life? What are you willing to struggle for?” Because that seems to be a greater
determinant of how our lives turn out.
For example, most people want to get the corner office and make a boatload of money—but not
many people want to suffer through sixty-hour workweeks, long commutes, obnoxious paperwork, and
arbitrary corporate hierarchies to escape the confines of an infinite cubicle hell.
Most people want to have great sex and an awesome relationship, but not everyone is willing to
go through the tough conversations, the awkward silences, the hurt feelings, and the emotional
psychodrama to get there. And so they settle. They settle and wonder, “What if?” for years and years,
until the question morphs from “What if?” into “What else?” And when the lawyers go home and the
alimony check is in the mail, they say, “What for?” If not for their lowered standards and expectations
twenty years prior, then what for?
Because happiness requires struggle. It grows from problems. Joy doesn’t just sprout out of the
ground like daisies and rainbows. Real, serious, lifelong fulfillment and meaning have to be earned
through the choosing and managing of our struggles. Whether you suffer from anxiety or loneliness or
obsessive-compulsive disorder or a dickhead boss who ruins half of your waking hours every day,
the solution lies in the acceptance and active engagement of that negative experience—not the
avoidance of it, not the salvation from it.
People want an amazing physique. But you don’t end up with one unless you legitimately
appreciate the pain and physical stress that come with living inside a gym for hour upon hour, unless
you love calculating and calibrating the food you eat, planning your life out in tiny plate–sized
portions.
People want to start their own business. But you don’t end up a successful entrepreneur unless you
find a way to appreciate the risk, the uncertainty, the repeated failures, the insane hours devoted to
something that may earn absolutely nothing.
People want a partner, a spouse. But you don’t end up attracting someone amazing without
appreciating the emotional turbulence that comes with weathering rejections, building the sexual
tension that never gets released, and staring blankly at a phone that never rings. It’s part of the game of
love. You can’t win if you don’t play.
What determines your success isn’t, “What do you want to enjoy?” The relevant question is,
“What pain do you want to sustain?” The path to happiness is a path full of shitheaps and shame.
You have to choose something. You can’t have a pain-free life. It can’t all be roses and unicorns
all the time. Pleasure is the easy question. And pretty much all of us have a similar answer.
The more interesting question is the pain. What is the pain that you want to sustain? That’s the
hard question that matters, the question that will actually get you somewhere. It’s the question that can
change a perspective, a life. It’s what makes me, me, and you, you. It’s what defines us and separates
us and ultimately brings us together.
For most of my adolescence and young adulthood, I fantasized about being a musician—a rock
star, in particular. Any badass guitar song I heard, I would always close my eyes and envision myself
up on stage, playing it to the screams of the crowd, people absolutely losing their minds to my sweet
finger-noodling glory. This fantasy could keep me occupied for hours on end. For me, it was never a
question of if I’d ever be up playing in front of screaming crowds, but when. I had it all planned out. I
was simply biding my time before I could invest the proper amount of energy and effort into getting
out there and making my mark. First I needed to finish school. Then I needed to make some extra
money to buy gear. Then I needed to find enough free time to practice. Then I had to network and plan
my first project. Then . . . and then nothing.
Despite my fantasizing about this for over half my lifetime, the reality never came to fruition. And
it took me a long time and a lot of struggle to finally figure out why: I didn’t actually want it.
I was in love with the result—the image of me on stage, people cheering, me rocking out, pouring
my heart into what I was playing—but I wasn’t in love with the process. And because of that, I failed
at it. Repeatedly. Hell, I didn’t even try hard enough to fail at it. I hardly tried at all. The daily
drudgery of practicing, the logistics of finding a group and rehearsing, the pain of finding gigs and
actually getting people to show up and give a shit, the broken strings, the blown tube amp, hauling
forty pounds of gear to and from rehearsals with no car. It’s a mountain of a dream and a mile-high
climb to the top. And what it took me a long time to discover is that I didn’t like to climb much. I just
liked to imagine the summit.
The common cultural narratives would tell me that I somehow failed myself, that I’m a quitter or a
loser, that I just didn’t “have it,” that I gave up on my dream and that maybe I let myself succumb to
the pressures of society.
But the truth is far less interesting than any of these explanations. The truth is, I thought I wanted
something, but it turns out I didn’t. End of story.
I wanted the reward and not the struggle. I wanted the result and not the process. I was in love
with not the fight but only the victory.
And life doesn’t work that way.
Who you are is defined by what you’re willing to struggle for. People who enjoy the struggles of a
gym are the ones who run triathlons and have chiseled abs and can bench-press a small house. People
who enjoy long workweeks and the politics of the corporate ladder are the ones who fly to the top of
it. People who enjoy the stresses and uncertainties of the starving artist lifestyle are ultimately the
ones who live it and make it.
This is not about willpower or grit. This is not another admonishment of “no pain, no gain.” This
is the most simple and basic component of life: our struggles determine our successes. Our problems
birth our happiness, along with slightly better, slightly upgraded problems.
See: it’s a never-ending upward spiral. And if you think at any point you’re allowed to stop
climbing, I’m afraid you’re missing the point. Because the joy is in the climb itself.
CHAPTER 3
You Are Not Special
I once knew a guy; we’ll call him Jimmy.
Jimmy always had various business ventures going. On any given day, if you asked him what he
was doing, he’d rattle off the name of some firm he was consulting with, or he’d describe a promising
medical app he was looking for angel investors to fund, or he’d talk about some charity event he was
supposed to be the keynote speaker for, or how he had an idea for a more efficient type of gas pump
that was going to make him billions. The guy was always rolling, always on, and if you gave him an
inch of conversational daylight, he’d pulverize you about how world-spinning his work was, how
brilliant his latest ideas were, and he’d name-drop so much it felt like you were talking to a tabloid
reporter.
Jimmy was all positivity all the time. Always pushing himself, always working an angle—a real
go-getter, whatever the fuck that means.
The catch was that Jimmy was also a total deadbeat—all talk and no walk. Stoned a majority of
the time, and spending as much money in bars and fine restaurants as he did on his “business ideas,”
Jimmy was a professional leech, living off his family’s hard-won money by spinning them as well as
everybody else in the city on false ideas of future tech glory. Sure, sometimes he’d put in some token
effort, or pick up the phone and cold-call some bigwig and name-drop until he ran out of names, but
nothing ever actually happened. None of these “ventures” ever blossomed into anything.
Yet the guy kept this up for years, living off girlfriends and more and more distant relatives well
into his late twenties. And the most screwed-up part was that Jimmy felt good about it. He had a
delusional level of self-confidence. People who laughed at him or hung up on him were, in his mind,
“missing the opportunity of their lives.” People who called him out on his bogus business ideas were
“too ignorant and inexperienced” to understand his genius. People who pointed out his deadbeat
lifestyle were “jealous”; they were “haters” who envied his success.
Jimmy did make some money, although it was usually through the sketchiest of means, like selling
another person’s business idea as his own, or finagling a loan from someone, or worse, talking
someone into giving him equity in their start-up. He actually occasionally talked people into paying
him to do some public speaking. (About what, I can’t even imagine.)
The worst part was that Jimmy believed his own bullshit. His delusion was so bulletproof, it was
honestly hard to get mad at him, it was actually kind of amazing.
Sometime in the 1960s, developing “high self-esteem”—having positive thoughts and feelings
about oneself—became all the rage in psychology. Research found that people who thought highly
about themselves generally performed better and caused fewer problems. Many researchers and
policymakers at the time came to believe that raising a population’s self-esteem could lead to some
tangible social benefits: lower crime, better academic records, greater employment, lower budget
deficits. As a result, beginning in the next decade, the 1970s, self-esteem practices began to be taught
to parents, emphasized by therapists, politicians, and teachers, and instituted into educational policy.
Grade inflation, for example, was implemented to make low-achieving kids feel better about their
lack of achievement. Participation awards and bogus trophies were invented for any number of
mundane and expected activities. Kids were given inane homework assignments, like writing down
all the reasons why they thought they were special, or the five things they liked most about
themselves. Pastors and ministers told their congregations that they were each uniquely special in
God’s eyes, and were destined to excel and not be average. Business and motivational seminars
cropped up chanting the same paradoxical mantra: every single one of us can be exceptional and
massively successful.
But it’s a generation later and the data is in: we’re not all exceptional. It turns out that merely
feeling good about yourself doesn’t really mean anything unless you have a good reason to feel good
about yourself. It turns out that adversity and failure are actually useful and even necessary for
developing strong-minded and successful adults. It turns out that teaching people to believe they’re
exceptional and to feel good about themselves no matter what doesn’t lead to a population full of Bill
Gateses and Martin Luther Kings. It leads to a population full of Jimmys.
Jimmy, the delusional start-up founder. Jimmy, who smoked pot every day and had no real
marketable skills other than talking himself up and believing it. Jimmy, the type of guy who yelled at
his business partner for being “immature,” and then maxed out the company credit card at Le
Bernardin trying to impress some Russian model. Jimmy, who was quickly running out of aunts and
uncles who could loan him more money.
Yes, that confident, high-self-esteem Jimmy. The Jimmy who spent so much time talking about
how good he was that he forgot to, you know, actually do something.
The problem with the self-esteem movement is that it measured self-esteem by how positively
people felt about themselves. But a true and accurate measurement of one’s self-worth is how people
feel about the negative aspects of themselves. If a person like Jimmy feels absolutely fucking great
99.9 percent of the time, despite his life falling apart around him, then how can that be a valid metric
for a successful and happy life?
Jimmy is entitled. That is, he feels as though he deserves good things without actually earning
them. He believes he should be able to be rich without actually working for it. He believes he should
be liked and well-connected without actually helping anyone. He believes he should have an amazing
lifestyle without actually sacrificing anything.
People like Jimmy become so fixated on feeling good about themselves that they manage to delude
themselves into believing that they are accomplishing great things even when they’re not. They
believe they’re the brilliant presenter on stage when actually they’re making a fool of themselves.
They believe they’re the successful start-up founder when, in fact, they’ve never had a successful
venture. They call themselves life coaches and charge money to help others, even though they’re only
twenty-five years old and haven’t actually accomplished anything substantial in their lives.
Entitled people exude a delusional degree of self-confidence. This confidence can be alluring to
others, at least for a little while. In some instances, the entitled person’s delusional level of
confidence can become contagious and help the people around the entitled person feel more confident
in themselves too. Despite all of Jimmy’s shenanigans, I have to admit that it was fun hanging out with
him sometimes. You felt indestructible around him.
But the problem with entitlement is that it makes people need to feel good about themselves all
the time, even at the expense of those around them. And because entitled people always need to feel
good about themselves, they end up spending most of their time thinking about themselves. After all, it
takes a lot of energy and work to convince yourself that your shit doesn’t stink, especially when
you’ve actually been living in a toilet.
Once people have developed the thought pattern to constantly construe what happens around them
as self-aggrandizing, it’s extremely hard to break them out of it. Any attempt to reason with them is
seen as simply another “threat” to their superiority by another person who “can’t handle” how
smart/talented/good-looking/successful they are.
Entitlement closes in upon itself in a kind of narcissistic bubble, distorting anything and
everything in such a way as to reinforce itself. People who feel entitled view every occurrence in
their life as either an affirmation of, or a threat to, their own greatness. If something good happens to
them, it’s because of some amazing feat they accomplished. If something bad happens to them, it’s
because somebody is jealous and trying to bring them down a notch. Entitlement is impervious.
People who are entitled delude themselves into whatever feeds their sense of superiority. They keep
their mental facade standing at all costs, even if it sometimes requires being physically or emotionally
abusive to those around them.
But entitlement is a failed strategy. It’s just another high. It’s not happiness.
The true measurement of self-worth is not how a person feels about her positive experiences, but
rather how she feels about her negative experiences. A person like Jimmy hides from his problems by
making up imagined successes for himself at every turn. And because he can’t face his problems, no
matter how good he feels about himself, he is weak.
A person who actually has a high self-worth is able to look at the negative parts of his character
frankly—“Yes, sometimes I’m irresponsible with money,” “Yes, sometimes I exaggerate my own
successes,” “Yes, I rely too much on others to support me and should be more self-reliant”—and then
acts to improve upon them. But entitled people, because they are incapable of acknowledging their
own problems openly and honestly, are incapable of improving their lives in any lasting or
meaningful way. They are left chasing high after high and accumulate greater and greater levels of
denial.
But eventually reality must hit, and the underlying problems will once again make themselves
clear. It’s just a question of when, and how painful it will be.
Things Fall Apart
I sat in my 9:00 A.M. biology class, arms cradling my head on my desk as I stared at the clock’s
second hand making laps, each tick syncopated with the teacher’s dronings-on about chromosomes
and mitosis. Like most thirteen-year-olds stuck in a stuffy, fluorescent classroom, I was bored.
A knock came on the door. Mr. Price, the school’s assistant principal, stuck his head in. “Excuse
me for interrupting. Mark, can you step outside with me for a moment? Oh, and bring your things with
you.”
Strange, I thought. Kids get sent to the principal, but the principal rarely gets sent to them. I
gathered my things and stepped out.
The hallway was empty. Hundreds of beige lockers converged on the horizon. “Mark, can you
take me to your locker, please?”
“Sure,” I say, and slug myself down the hall, baggy jeans and moppy hair and oversized Pantera
T-shirt and all.
We get to my locker. “Open it, please,” Mr. Price says; so I do. He steps in front of me and gathers
my coat, my gym bag, my backpack—all of the locker’s contents, minus a few notebooks and pencils.
He starts walking away. “Come with me, please,” he says, without looking back. I start to get an
uneasy feeling.
I follow him to his office, where he asks me to sit down. He closes the door and locks it. He goes
over to the window and adjusts the blinds to block the view from outside. My palms begin to sweat.
This is not a normal principal visit.
Mr. Price sits down and quietly rummages through my things, checking pockets, unzipping zippers,
shaking out my gym clothes and placing them on the floor.
Without looking up at me, Mr. Price asks, “Do you know what I’m looking for, Mark?”
“No,” I say.
“Drugs.”
The word shocks me into nervous attention.
“D-d-drugs?” I stammer. “What kind?”
He looks at me sternly. “I don’t know; what kind do you have?” He opens one of my binders and
checks the small pockets meant for pens.
My sweat blossoms like a fungal growth. It spreads from my palms to my arms and now my neck.
My temples pulsate as blood floods my brain and face. Like most thirteen-year-olds freshly accused
of possessing narcotics and bringing them to school, I want to run away and hide.
“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” I protest, the words sounding far meeker than I’d like. I
feel as if I should be sounding confident in myself right now. Or maybe not. Maybe I should be
scared. Do liars sound more scared or confident? Because however they sound, I want to sound the
opposite. Instead, my lack of confidence compounds, unconfidence about my sounding unconfident
making me more unconfident. That fucking Feedback Loop from Hell.
“We’ll see about that,” he says, turning his attention to my backpack, which seemingly has one
hundred pockets. Each is loaded with its own silly teen desiderata—colored pens, old notes passed
in class, early-nineties CDs with cracked cases, dried-up markers, an old sketchpad with half its
pages missing, dust and lint and crap accumulated during a maddeningly circuitous middle school
existence.
My sweat must be pumping at the speed of light, because time extends itself and dilates such that
what is mere seconds on that 9:00 A.M. second-period biology clock now feels like Paleolithic eons,
and I’m growing up and dying every minute. Just me and Mr. Price and my bottomless backpack.
Somewhere around the Mesolithic Age, Mr. Price finishes searching the backpack. Having found
nothing, he seems flustered. He turns the pack upside down and lets all of my crap crash onto his
office floor. He’s now sweating as profusely as I am, except in place of my terror, there is his anger.
“No drugs today, eh?” He tries to sound casual.
“Nope.” So do I.
He spreads my stuff out, separating each item and coagulating them into little piles beside my gym
gear. My coat and backpack now lie empty and lifeless on his lap. He sighs and stares at the wall.
Like most thirteen-year-olds locked in an office with a man angrily throwing their shit all over the
floor, I want to cry.
Mr. Price scans the contents organized on the floor. Nothing illicit or illegal, no narcotics, not
even anything against school policy. He sighs and then throws the coat and backpack on the floor too.
He bends over and puts his elbows on his knees, making his face level with mine.
“Mark, I’m going to give you one last chance to be honest with me. If you are honest, this will turn
out much better for you. If it turns out you’re lying, then it’s going to be much worse.”
As if on cue, I gulp.
“Now tell me the truth,” Mr. Price demands. “Did you bring drugs to school today?”
Fighting back tears, screams clawing at my throat, I stare my tormentor in the face and, in a
pleading voice, dying to be relieved of its adolescent horrors, I say, “No, I don’t have any drugs. I
have no idea what you’re talking about.”
“Okay,” he says, signaling surrender. “I guess you can collect your things and go.”
He takes one last, longing gaze at my deflated backpack, lying like a broken promise there on his
office floor. He casually puts one foot down on the pack, stomping lightly, a last-ditch effort. I
anxiously wait for him to get up and leave so I can get on with my life and forget this whole
nightmare.
But his foot stops on something. “What is this?” he asks, tapping with his foot.
“What is what?” I say.
“There’s still something in here.” He picks up the bag and starts feeling around the bottom of it.
For me the room gets fuzzy; everything goes wobbly.
When I was young, I was smart. I was friendly. But I was also a shithead. I mean that in the most
loving way possible. I was a rebellious, lying little shithead. Angry and full of resentment. When I
was twelve, I hacked my house’s security system with refrigerator magnets so I could sneak out
undetected in the middle of the night. My friend and I would put his mom’s car in neutral and push it
into the street so we could drive around without waking her up. I would write papers about abortion
because I knew my English teacher was a hardcore conservative Christian. Another friend and I stole
cigarettes from his mom and sold them to kids out behind the school.
And I also cut a secret compartment into the bottom of my backpack to hide my marijuana.
That was the same hidden compartment Mr. Price found after stepping on the drugs I was hiding. I
had been lying. And, as promised, Mr. Price didn’t go easy on me. A few hours later, like most
thirteen-year-olds handcuffed in the back of a police car, I thought my life was over.
And I was kind of right, in a way. My parents quarantined me at home. I was to have no friends
for the foreseeable future. Having been expelled from school, I was to be homeschooled for the rest
of the year. My mom made me get a haircut and threw out all of my Marilyn Manson and Metallica
shirts (which, for an adolescent in 1998, was tantamount to being sentenced to death by lameness).
My dad dragged me to his office with him in the mornings and made me file papers for hours on end.
Once homeschooling was over, I was enrolled in a small, private Christian school, where—and this
may not surprise you—I didn’t exactly fit in.
And just when I had finally cleaned up my act and turned in my assignments and learned the value
of good clerical responsibility, my parents decided to get divorced.
I tell you all of this only to point out that my adolescence sucked donkey balls. I lost all of my
friends, my community, my legal rights, and my family within the span of about nine months. My
therapist in my twenties would later call this “some real traumatic shit,” and I would spend the next
decade-and-change working on unraveling it and becoming less of a self-absorbed, entitled little
prick.
The problem with my home life back then was not all of the horrible things that were said or
done; rather, it was all of the horrible things that needed to be said and done but weren’t. My family
stonewalls the way Warren Buffett makes money or Jenna Jameson fucks: we’re champions at it. The
house could have been burning down around us and it would have been met with, “Oh no,
everything’s fine. A tad warm in here, perhaps—but really, everything’s fine.”
When my parents got divorced, there were no broken dishes, no slammed doors, no screaming
arguments about who fucked whom. Once they had reassured my brother and me that it wasn’t our
fault, we had a Q&A session—yes, you read that right—about the logistics of the new living
arrangements. Not a tear was shed. Not a voice was raised. The closest peek my brother and I got into
our parents’ unraveling emotional lives was hearing, “Nobody cheated on anybody.” Oh, that’s nice. It
was a tad warm in the room, but really, everything was fine.
My parents are good people. I don’t blame them for any of this (not anymore, at least). And I love
them very much. They have their own stories and their own journeys and their own problems, just as
all parents do. And just as all of their parents do, and so on. And like all parents, my parents, with the
best of intentions, imparted some of their problems to me, as I probably will to my kids.
When “real traumatic shit” like this happens in our lives, we begin to unconsciously feel as though
we have problems that we’re incapable of ever solving. And this assumed inability to solve our
problems causes us to feel miserable and helpless.
But it also causes something else to happen. If we have problems that are unsolvable, our
unconscious figures that we’re either uniquely special or uniquely defective in some way. That we’re
somehow unlike everyone else and that the rules must be different for us.
Put simply: we become entitled.
The pain from my adolescence led me down a road of entitlement that lasted through much of my
early adulthood. Whereas Jimmy’s entitlement played out in the business world, where he pretended
to be a huge success, my entitlement played out in my relationships, particularly with women. My
trauma had revolved around intimacy and acceptance, so I felt a constant need to overcompensate, to
prove to myself that I was loved and accepted at all times. And as a result, I soon took to chasing
women the same way a cocaine addict takes to a snowman made out of cocaine: I made sweet love to
it, and then promptly suffocated myself in it.
I became a player—an immature, selfish, albeit sometimes charming player. And I strung up a
long series of superficial and unhealthy relationships for the better part of a decade.
It wasn’t so much the sex I craved, although the sex was fun. It was the validation. I was wanted; I
was loved; for the first time since I could remember, I was worthy. My craving for validation quickly
fed into a mental habit of self-aggrandizing and overindulgence. I felt entitled to say or do whatever I
wanted, to break people’s trust, to ignore people’s feelings, and then justify it later with shitty, halfassed
apologies.
While this period certainly had its moments of fun and excitement, and I met some wonderful
women, my life was more or less a wreck the whole time. I was often unemployed, living on friends’
couches or with my mom, drinking way more than I should have been, alienating a number of friends
—and when I did meet a woman I really liked, my self-absorption quickly torpedoed everything.
The deeper the pain, the more helpless we feel against our problems, and the more entitlement we
adopt to compensate for those problems. This entitlement plays out in one of two ways:
1. I’m awesome and the rest of you all suck, so I deserve special treatment.
2. I suck and the rest of you are all awesome, so I deserve special treatment.
Opposite mindset on the outside, but the same selfish creamy core in the middle. In fact, you will
often see entitled people flip back and forth between the two. Either they’re on top of the world or the
world is on top of them, depending on the day of the week, or how well they’re doing with their
particular addiction at that moment.
Most people correctly identify a person like Jimmy as a raging narcissistic ass-hat. That’s
because he’s pretty blatant in his delusionally high self-regard. What most people don’t correctly
identify as entitlement are those people who perpetually feel as though they’re inferior and unworthy
of the world.
Because construing everything in life so as to make yourself out to be constantly victimized
requires just as much selfishness as the opposite. It takes just as much energy and delusional selfaggrandizement
to maintain the belief that one has insurmountable problems as that one has no
problems at all.
The truth is that there’s no such thing as a personal problem. If you’ve got a problem, chances are
millions of other people have had it in the past, have it now, and are going to have it in the future.
Likely people you know too. That doesn’t minimize the problem or mean that it shouldn’t hurt. It
doesn’t mean you aren’t legitimately a victim in some circumstances.
It just means that you’re not special.
Often, it’s this realization—that you and your problems are actually not privileged in their
severity or pain—that is the first and most important step toward solving them.
But for some reason, it appears that more and more people, particularly young people, are
forgetting this. Numerous professors and educators have noted a lack of emotional resilience and an
excess of selfish demands in today’s young people. It’s not uncommon now for books to be removed
from a class’s curriculum for no other reason than that they made someone feel bad. Speakers and
professors are shouted down and banned from campuses for infractions as simple as suggesting that
maybe some Halloween costumes really aren’t that offensive. School counselors note that more
students than ever are exhibiting severe signs of emotional distress over what are otherwise run-ofthe-mill
daily college experiences, such as an argument with a roommate, or getting a low grade in a
class.
It’s strange that in an age when we are more connected than ever, entitlement seems to be at an alltime
high. Something about recent technology seems to allow our insecurities to run amok like never
before. The more freedom we’re given to express ourselves, the more we want to be free of having to
deal with anyone who may disagree with us or upset us. The more exposed we are to opposing
viewpoints, the more we seem to get upset that those other viewpoints exist. The easier and more
problem-free our lives become, the more we seem to feel entitled for them to get even better.
The benefits of the Internet and social media are unquestionably fantastic. In many ways, this is
the best time in history to be alive. But perhaps these technologies are having some unintended social
side effects. Perhaps these same technologies that have liberated and educated so many are
simultaneously enabling people’s sense of entitlement more than ever before.
The Tyranny of Exceptionalism
Most of us are pretty average at most things we do. Even if you’re exceptional at one thing, chances
are you’re average or below average at most other things. That’s just the nature of life. To become
truly great at something, you have to dedicate shit-tons of time and energy to it. And because we all
have limited time and energy, few of us ever become truly exceptional at more than one thing, if
anything at all.
We can then say that it’s a statistical improbability that any single person will be an extraordinary
performer in all areas of life, or even in many areas of their life. Brilliant businesspeople are often
fuckups in their personal lives. Extraordinary athletes are often shallow and as dumb as a
lobotomized rock. Many celebrities are probably just as clueless about life as the people who gawk
at them and follow their every move.
We’re all, for the most part, pretty average people. But it’s the extremes that get all of the
publicity. We kind of know this already, but we rarely think and/or talk about it, and we certainly
never discuss why this could be a problem.
Having the Internet, Google, Facebook, YouTube, and access to five hundred–plus channels of
television is amazing. But our attention is limited. There’s no way we can process the tidal waves of
information flowing past us constantly. Therefore, the only zeroes and ones that break through and
catch our attention are the truly exceptional pieces of information—those in the 99.999th percentile.
All day, every day, we are flooded with the truly extraordinary. The best of the best. The worst of
the worst. The greatest physical feats. The funniest jokes. The most upsetting news. The scariest
threats. Nonstop.
Our lives today are filled with information from the extremes of the bell curve of human
experience, because in the media business that’s what gets eyeballs, and eyeballs bring dollars.
That’s the bottom line. Yet the vast majority of life resides in the humdrum middle. The vast majority
of life is unextraordinary, indeed quite average.
This flood of extreme information has conditioned us to believe that exceptionalism is the new
normal. And because we’re all quite average most of the time, the deluge of exceptional information
drives us to feel pretty damn insecure and desperate, because clearly we are somehow not good
enough. So more and more we feel the need to compensate through entitlement and addiction. We
cope the only way we know how: either through self-aggrandizing or through other-aggrandizing.
Some of us do this by cooking up get-rich-quick schemes. Others do it by taking off across the
world to save starving babies in Africa. Others do it by excelling in school and winning every award.
Others do it by shooting up a school. Others do it by trying to have sex with anything that talks and
breathes.
This ties in to the growing culture of entitlement that I talked about earlier. Millennials often get
blamed for this cultural shift, but that’s likely because millennials are the most plugged-in and visible
generation. In fact, the tendency toward entitlement is apparent across all of society. And I believe it’s
linked to mass-media-driven exceptionalism.
The problem is that the pervasiveness of technology and mass marketing is screwing up a lot of
people’s expectations for themselves. The inundation of the exceptional makes people feel worse
about themselves, makes them feel that they need to be more extreme, more radical, and more selfassured
to get noticed or even matter.
When I was a young man, my insecurities around intimacy were exacerbated by all the ridiculous
narratives of masculinity circulating throughout pop culture. And those same narratives are still
circulating: to be a cool guy, you have to party like a rock star; to be respected, you have to be
admired by women; sex is the most valuable thing a man can attain, and it’s worth sacrificing anything
(including your own dignity) to get it.
This constant stream of unrealistic media dogpiles onto our existing feelings of insecurity, by
overexposing us to the unrealistic standards we fail to live up to. Not only do we feel subjected to
unsolvable problems, but we feel like losers because a simple Google search shows us thousands of
people without those same problems.
Technology has solved old economic problems by giving us new psychological problems. The
Internet has not just open-sourced information; it has also open-sourced insecurity, self-doubt, and
shame.
B-b-b-but, If I’m Not Going to Be Special or Extraordinary,
What’s the Point?
It has become an accepted part of our culture today to believe that we are all destined to do
something truly extraordinary. Celebrities say it. Business tycoons say it. Politicians say it. Even
Oprah says it (so it must be true). Each and every one of us can be extraordinary. We all deserve
greatness.
The fact that this statement is inherently contradictory—after all, if everyone were extraordinary,
then by definition no one would be extraordinary—is missed by most people. And instead of
questioning what we actually deserve or don’t deserve, we eat the message up and ask for more.
Being “average” has become the new standard of failure. The worst thing you can be is in the
middle of the pack, the middle of the bell curve. When a culture’s standard of success is to “be
extraordinary,” it then becomes better to be at the extreme low end of the bell curve than to be in the
middle, because at least there you’re still special and deserve attention. Many people choose this
strategy: to prove to everyone that they are the most miserable, or the most oppressed, or the most
victimized.
A lot of people are afraid to accept mediocrity because they believe that if they accept it, they’ll
never achieve anything, never improve, and that their life won’t matter.
This sort of thinking is dangerous. Once you accept the premise that a life is worthwhile only if it
is truly notable and great, then you basically accept the fact that most of the human population
(including yourself) sucks and is worthless. And this mindset can quickly turn dangerous, to both
yourself and others.
The rare people who do become truly exceptional at something do so not because they believe
they’re exceptional. On the contrary, they become amazing because they’re obsessed with
improvement. And that obsession with improvement stems from an unerring belief that they are, in
fact, not that great at all. It’s anti-entitlement. People who become great at something become great
because they understand that they’re not already great—they are mediocre, they are average—and that
they could be so much better.
All of this “every person can be extraordinary and achieve greatness” stuff is basically just
jerking off your ego. It’s a message that tastes good going down, but in reality is nothing more than
empty calories that make you emotionally fat and bloated, the proverbial Big Mac for your heart and
your brain.
The ticket to emotional health, like that to physical health, comes from eating your veggies—that
is, accepting the bland and mundane truths of life: truths such as “Your actions actually don’t matter
that much in the grand scheme of things” and “The vast majority of your life will be boring and not
noteworthy, and that’s okay.” This vegetable course will taste bad at first. Very bad. You will avoid
accepting it.
But once ingested, your body will wake up feeling more potent and more alive. After all, that
constant pressure to be something amazing, to be the next big thing, will be lifted off your back. The
stress and anxiety of always feeling inadequate and constantly needing to prove yourself will
dissipate. And the knowledge and acceptance of your own mundane existence will actually free you
to accomplish what you truly wish to accomplish, without judgment or lofty expectations.
You will have a growing appreciation for life’s basic experiences: the pleasures of simple
friendship, creating something, helping a person in need, reading a good book, laughing with someone
you care about.
Sounds boring, doesn’t it? That’s because these things are ordinary. But maybe they’re ordinary
for a reason: because they are what actually matters.
CHAPTER 4
The Value of Suffering
In the closing months of 1944, after almost a decade of war, the tide was turning against Japan. Their
economy was floundering, their military overstretched across half of Asia, and the territories they had
won throughout the Pacific were now toppling like dominoes to U.S. forces. Defeat seemed
inevitable.
On December 26, 1944, Second Lieutenant Hiroo Onoda of the Japanese Imperial Army was
deployed to the small island of Lubang in the Philippines. His orders were to slow the United States’
progress as much as possible, to stand and fight at all costs, and to never surrender. Both he and his
commander knew it was essentially a suicide mission.
In February 1945, the Americans arrived on Lubang and took the island with overwhelming force.
Within days, most of the Japanese soldiers had either surrendered or been killed, but Onoda and three
of his men managed to hide in the jungle. From there, they began a guerrilla warfare campaign against
the U.S. forces and the local population, attacking supply lines, shooting at stray soldiers, and
interfering with the American forces in any way that they could.
That August, half a year later, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the cities of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki. Japan surrendered, and the deadliest war in human history came to its dramatic
conclusion.
However, thousands of Japanese soldiers were still scattered among the Pacific isles, and most,
like Onoda, were hiding in the jungle, unaware that the war was over. These holdouts continued to
fight and pillage as they had before. This was a real problem for rebuilding eastern Asia after the
war, and the governments agreed something must be done.
The U.S. military, in conjunction with the Japanese government, dropped thousands of leaflets
throughout the Pacific region, announcing that the war was over and it was time for everyone to go
home. Onoda and his men, like many others, found and read these leaflets, but unlike most of the
others, Onoda decided that they were fake, a trap set by the American forces to get the guerrilla
fighters to show themselves. Onoda burned the leaflets, and he and his men stayed hidden and
continued to fight.
Five years went by. The leaflets had stopped, and most of the American forces had long since
gone home. The local population on Lubang attempted to return to their normal lives of farming and
fishing. Yet there were Hiroo Onoda and his merry men, still shooting at the farmers, burning their
crops, stealing their livestock, and murdering locals who wandered too far into the jungle. The
Philippine government then took to drawing up new flyers and spreading them out across the jungle.
Come out, they said. The war is over. You lost.
But these, too, were ignored.
In 1952, the Japanese government made one final effort to draw the last remaining soldiers out of
hiding throughout the Pacific. This time, letters and pictures from the missing soldiers’ families were
air-dropped, along with a personal note from the emperor himself. Once again, Onoda refused to
believe that the information was real. Once again, he believed the airdrop to be a trick by the
Americans. Once again, he and his men stood and continued to fight.
Another few years went by and the Philippine locals, sick of being terrorized, finally armed
themselves and began firing back. By 1959, one of Onoda’s companions had surrendered, and another
had been killed. Then, a decade later, Onoda’s last companion, a man called Kozuka, was killed in a
shootout with the local police while he was burning rice fields—still waging war against the local
population a full quarter-century after the end of World War II!
Onoda, having now spent more than half of his life in the jungles of Lubang, was all alone.
In 1972, the news of Kozuka’s death reached Japan and caused a stir. The Japanese people
thought the last of the soldiers from the war had come home years earlier. The Japanese media began
to wonder: if Kozuka had still been on Lubang until 1972, then perhaps Onoda himself, the last known
Japanese holdout from World War II, might still be alive as well. That year, both the Japanese and
Philippine governments sent search parties to look for the enigmatic second lieutenant, now part myth,
part hero, and part ghost.
They found nothing.
As the months progressed, the story of Lieutenant Onoda morphed into something of an urban
legend in Japan—the war hero who sounded too insane to actually exist. Many romanticized him.
Others criticized him. Others thought he was the stuff of fairy tale, invented by those who still wanted
to believe in a Japan that had disappeared long ago.
It was around this time that a young man named Norio Suzuki first heard of Onoda. Suzuki was an
adventurer, an explorer, and a bit of a hippie. Born after the war ended, he had dropped out of school
and spent four years hitchhiking his way across Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, sleeping on park
benches, in stranger’s cars, in jail cells, and under the stars. He volunteered on farms for food, and
donated blood to pay for places to stay. He was a free spirit, and perhaps a little bit nuts.
In 1972, Suzuki needed another adventure. He had returned to Japan after his travels and found the
strict cultural norms and social hierarchy to be stifling. He hated school. He couldn’t hold down a
job. He wanted to be back on the road, back on his own again.
For Suzuki, the legend of Hiroo Onoda came as the answer to his problems. It was a new and
worthy adventure for him to pursue. Suzuki believed that he would be the one who would find Onoda.
Sure, search parties conducted by the Japanese, Philippine, and American governments had not been
able to find Onoda; local police forces had been scavenging the jungle for almost thirty years with no
luck; thousands of leaflets had met with no response—but fuck it, this deadbeat, college-dropout
hippie was going to be the one to find him.
Unarmed and untrained for any sort of reconnaissance or tactical warfare, Suzuki traveled to
Lubang and began wandering around the jungle all by himself. His strategy: scream Onoda’s name
really loudly and tell him that the emperor was worried about him.
He found Onoda in four days.
Suzuki stayed with Onoda in the jungle for some time. Onoda had been alone by that point for
over a year, and once found by Suzuki he welcomed the companionship and was desperate to learn
what had been happening in the outside world from a Japanese source he could trust. The two men
became sorta-kinda friends.
Suzuki asked Onoda why he had stayed and continued to fight. Onoda said it was simple: he had
been given the order to “never surrender,” so he stayed. For nearly thirty years he had simply been
following an order. Onoda then asked Suzuki why a “hippie boy” like himself came looking for him.
Suzuki said that he’d left Japan in search of three things: “Lieutenant Onoda, a panda bear, and the
Abominable Snowman, in that order.”
The two men had been brought together under the most curious of circumstances: two wellintentioned
adventurers chasing false visions of glory, like a real-life Japanese Don Quixote and
Sancho Panza, stuck together in the damp recesses of a Philippine jungle, both imagining themselves
heroes, despite both being alone with nothing, doing nothing. Onoda had already by then given up
most of his life to a phantom war. Suzuki would give his up too. Having already found Hiroo Onoda
and the panda bear, he would die a few years later in the Himalayas, still in search of the Abominable
Snowman.
Humans often choose to dedicate large portions of their lives to seemingly useless or destructive
causes. On the surface, these causes make no sense. It’s hard to imagine how Onoda could have been
happy on that island for those thirty years—living off insects and rodents, sleeping in the dirt,
murdering civilians decade after decade. Or why Suzuki trekked off to his own death, with no money,
no companions, and no purpose other than to chase an imaginary Yeti.
Yet, later in his life, Onoda said he regretted nothing. He claimed that he was proud of his choices
and his time on Lubang. He said that it had been an honor to devote a sizable portion of his life in
service to a nonexistent empire. Suzuki, had he survived, likely would have said something similar:
that he was doing exactly what he was meant to do, that he regretted nothing.
These men both chose how they wished to suffer. Hiroo Onoda chose to suffer for loyalty to a
dead empire. Suzuki chose to suffer for adventure, no matter how ill-advised. To both men, their
suffering meant something; it fulfilled some greater cause. And because it meant something, they were
able to endure it, or perhaps even enjoy it.
If suffering is inevitable, if our problems in life are unavoidable, then the question we should be
asking is not “How do I stop suffering?” but “Why am I suffering—for what purpose?”
Hiroo Onoda returned to Japan in 1974 and became a kind of celebrity in his home country. He
was shuttled around from talk show to radio station; politicians clamored to shake his hand; he
published a book and was even offered a large sum of money by the government.
But what he found when he returned to Japan horrified him: a consumerist, capitalist, superficial
culture that had lost all of the traditions of honor and sacrifice upon which his generation had been
raised.
Onoda tried to use his sudden celebrity to espouse the values of Old Japan, but he was tone-deaf
to this new society. He was seen more as a showpiece than as a serious cultural thinker—a Japanese
man who had emerged from a time capsule for all to marvel at, like a relic in a museum.
And in the irony of ironies, Onoda became far more depressed than he’d ever been in the jungle
for all those years. At least in the jungle his life had stood for something; it had meant something. That
had made his suffering endurable, indeed even a little bit desirable. But back in Japan, in what he
considered to be a vacuous nation full of hippies and loose women in Western clothing, he was
confronted with the unavoidable truth: that his fighting had meant nothing. The Japan he had lived and
fought for no longer existed. And the weight of this realization pierced him in a way that no bullet
ever had. Because his suffering had meant nothing, it suddenly became realized and true: thirty years
wasted.
And so, in 1980, Onoda packed up and moved to Brazil, where he remained until he died.
The Self-Awareness Onion
Self-awareness is like an onion. There are multiple layers to it, and the more you peel them back, the
more likely you’re going to start crying at inappropriate times.
Let’s say the first layer of the self-awareness onion is a simple understanding of one’s emotions.
“This is when I feel happy.” “This makes me feel sad.” “This gives me hope.”
Unfortunately, there are many people who suck at even this most basic level of self-awareness. I
know because I’m one of them. My wife and I sometimes have a fun back-and-forth that goes
something like this:
HER. What’s wrong?
ME. Nothing’s wrong. Nothing at all.
HER. No, something’s wrong. Tell me.
ME. I’m fine. Really.
HER. Are you sure? You look upset.
ME, with nervous laughter. Really? No, I’m okay, seriously.
[Thirty minutes later . . . ]
ME. . . . And that’s why I’m so fucking pissed off! He just acts as if I don’t exist half the time.
We all have emotional blind spots. Often they have to do with the emotions that we were taught
were inappropriate growing up. It takes years of practice and effort to get good at identifying blind
spots in ourselves and then expressing the affected emotions appropriately. But this task is hugely
important, and worth the effort.
The second layer of the self-awareness onion is an ability to ask why we feel certain emotions.
These why questions are difficult and often take months or even years to answer consistently and
accurately. Most people need to go to some sort of therapist just to hear these questions asked for the
first time. Such questions are important because they illuminate what we consider success or failure.
Why do you feel angry? Is it because you failed to achieve some goal? Why do you feel lethargic and
uninspired? Is it because you don’t think you’re good enough?
This layer of questioning helps us understand the root cause of the emotions that overwhelm us.
Once we understand that root cause, we can ideally do something to change it.
But there’s another, even deeper level of the self-awareness onion. And that one is full of fucking
tears. The third level is our personal values: Why do I consider this to be success/failure? How am I
choosing to measure myself? By what standard am I judging myself and everyone around me?
This level, which takes constant questioning and effort, is incredibly difficult to reach. But it’s the
most important, because our values determine the nature of our problems, and the nature of our
problems determines the quality of our lives.
Values underlie everything we are and do. If what we value is unhelpful, if what we consider
success/failure is poorly chosen, then everything based upon those values—the thoughts, the
emotions, the day-to-day feelings—will all be out of whack. Everything we think and feel about a
situation ultimately comes back to how valuable we perceive it to be.
Most people are horrible at answering these why questions accurately, and this prevents them
from achieving a deeper knowledge of their own values. Sure, they may say they value honesty and a
true friend, but then they turn around and lie about you behind your back to make themselves feel
better. People may perceive that they feel lonely. But when they ask themselves why they feel lonely,
they tend to come up with a way to blame others—everyone else is mean, or no one is cool or smart
enough to understand them—and thus they further avoid their problem instead of seeking to solve it.
For many people this passes as self-awareness. And yet, if they were able to go deeper and look
at their underlying values, they would see that their original analysis was based on avoiding
responsibility for their own problem, rather than accurately identifying the problem. They would see
that their decisions were based on chasing highs, not generating true happiness.
Most self-help gurus ignore this deeper level of self-awareness as well. They take people who
are miserable because they want to be rich, and then give them all sorts of advice on how to make
more money, all the while ignoring important values-based questions: Why do they feel such a need to
be rich in the first place? How are they choosing to measure success/failure for themselves? Is it not
perhaps some particular value that’s the root cause of their unhappiness, and not the fact that they
don’t drive a Bentley yet?
Much of the advice out there operates at a shallow level of simply trying to make people feel
good in the short term, while the real long-term problems never get solved. People’s perceptions and
feelings may change, but the underlying values, and the metrics by which those values are assessed,
stay the same. This is not real progress. This is just another way to achieve more highs.
Honest self-questioning is difficult. It requires asking yourself simple questions that are
uncomfortable to answer. In fact, in my experience, the more uncomfortable the answer, the more
likely it is to be true.
Take a moment and think of something that’s really bugging you. Now ask yourself why it bugs
you. Chances are the answer will involve a failure of some sort. Then take that failure and ask why it
seems “true” to you. What if that failure wasn’t really a failure? What if you’ve been looking at it the
wrong way?
A recent example from my own life:
“It bugs me that my brother doesn’t return my texts or emails.”
Why?
“Because it feels like he doesn’t give a shit about me.”
Why does this seem true?
“Because if he wanted to have a relationship with me, he would take ten seconds out of his day to
interact with me.”
Why does his lack of relationship with you feel like a failure?
“Because we’re brothers; we’re supposed to have a good relationship!”
Two things are operating here: a value that I hold dear, and a metric that I use to assess progress
toward that value. My value: brothers are supposed to have a good relationship with one another. My
metric: being in contact by phone or email—this is how I measure my success as a brother. By
holding on to this metric, I make myself feel like a failure, which occasionally ruins my Saturday
mornings.
We could dig even deeper, by repeating the process:
Why are brothers supposed to have a good relationship?
“Because they’re family, and family are supposed to be close!”
Why does that seem true?
“Because your family is supposed to matter to you more than anyone else!”
Why does that seem true?
“Because being close with your family is ‘normal’ and ‘healthy,’ and I don’t have that.”
In this exchange I’m clear about my underlying value—having a good relationship with my brother
—but I’m still struggling with my metric. I’ve given it another name, “closeness,” but the metric
hasn’t really changed: I’m still judging myself as a brother based on frequency of contact—and
comparing myself, using that metric, against other people I know. Everyone else (or so it seems) has a
close relationship with their family members, and I don’t. So obviously there must be something
wrong with me.
But what if I’m choosing a poor metric for myself and my life? What else could be true that I’m
not considering? Well, perhaps I don’t need to be close to my brother to have that good relationship
that I value. Perhaps there just needs to be some mutual respect (which there is). Or maybe mutual
trust is what to look for (and it’s there). Perhaps these metrics would be better assessments of
brotherhood than how many text messages he and I exchange.
This clearly makes sense; it feels true for me. But it still fucking hurts that my brother and I aren’t
close. And there’s no positive way to spin it. There’s no secret way to glorify myself through this
knowledge. Sometimes brothers—even brothers who love each other—don’t have close
relationships, and that’s fine. It is hard to accept at first, but that’s fine. What is objectively true about
your situation is not as important as how you come to see the situation, how you choose to measure it
and value it. Problems may be inevitable, but the meaning of each problem is not. We get to control
what our problems mean based on how we choose to think about them, the standard by which we
choose to measure them.
Rock Star Problems
In 1983, a talented young guitarist was kicked out of his band in the worst possible way. The band
had just been signed to a record deal, and they were about to record their first album. But a couple
days before recording began, the band showed the guitarist the door—no warning, no discussion, no
dramatic blowout; they literally woke him up one day by handing him a bus ticket home.
As he sat on the bus back to Los Angeles from New York, the guitarist kept asking himself: How
did this happen? What did I do wrong? What will I do now? Record contracts didn’t exactly fall out
of the sky, especially for raucous, upstart metal bands. Had he missed his one and only shot?
But by the time the bus hit L.A., the guitarist had gotten over his self-pity and had vowed to start a
new band. He decided that this new band would be so successful that his old band would forever
regret their decision. He would become so famous that they would be subjected to decades of seeing
him on TV, hearing him on the radio, seeing posters of him in the streets and pictures of him in
magazines. They’d be flipping burgers somewhere, loading vans from their shitty club gigs, fat and
drunk with their ugly wives, and he’d be rocking out in front of stadium crowds live on television.
He’d bathe in the tears of his betrayers, each tear wiped dry by a crisp, clean hundred-dollar bill.
And so the guitarist worked as if possessed by a musical demon. He spent months recruiting the
best musicians he could find—far better musicians than his previous bandmates. He wrote dozens of
songs and practiced religiously. His seething anger fueled his ambition; revenge became his muse.
Within a couple years, his new band had signed a record deal of their own, and a year after that, their
first record would go gold.
The guitarist’s name was Dave Mustaine, and the new band he formed was the legendary heavymetal
band Megadeth. Megadeth would go on to sell over 25 million albums and tour the world many
times over. Today, Mustaine is considered one of the most brilliant and influential musicians in the
history of heavy-metal music.
Unfortunately, the band he was kicked out of was Metallica, which has sold over 180 million
albums worldwide. Metallica is considered by many to be one of the greatest rock bands of all time.
And because of this, in a rare intimate interview in 2003, a tearful Mustaine admitted that he
couldn’t help but still consider himself a failure. Despite all that he had accomplished, in his mind he
would always be the guy who got kicked out of Metallica.
We’re apes. We think we’re all sophisticated with our toaster ovens and designer footwear, but
we’re just a bunch of finely ornamented apes. And because we are apes, we instinctually measure
ourselves against others and vie for status. The question is not whether we evaluate ourselves against
others; rather, the question is by what standard do we measure ourselves?
Dave Mustaine, whether he realized it or not, chose to measure himself by whether he was more
successful and popular than Metallica. The experience of getting thrown out of his former band was
so painful for him that he adopted “success relative to Metallica” as the metric by which to measure
himself and his music career.
Despite taking a horrible event in his life and making something positive out of it, as Mustaine did
with Megadeth, his choice to hold on to Metallica’s success as his life-defining metric continued to
hurt him decades later. Despite all the money and the fans and the accolades, he still considered
himself a failure.
Now, you and I may look at Dave Mustaine’s situation and laugh. Here’s this guy with millions of
dollars, hundreds of thousands of adoring fans, a career doing the thing he loves best, and still he’s
getting all weepy-eyed that his rock star buddies from twenty years ago are way more famous than he
is.
This is because you and I have different values than Mustaine does, and we measure ourselves by
different metrics. Our metrics are probably more like “I don’t want to work a job for a boss I hate,”
or “I’d like to earn enough money to send my kid to a good school,” or “I’d be happy to not wake up
in a drainage ditch.” And by these metrics, Mustaine is wildly, unimaginably successful. But by his
metric, “Be more popular and successful than Metallica,” he’s a failure.
Our values determine the metrics by which we measure ourselves and everyone else. Onoda’s
value of loyalty to the Japanese empire is what sustained him on Lubang for almost thirty years. But
this same value is also what made him miserable upon his return to Japan. Mustaine’s metric of being
better than Metallica likely helped him launch an incredibly successful music career. But that same
metric later tortured him in spite of his success.
If you want to change how you see your problems, you have to change what you value and/or how
you measure failure/success.
As an example, let’s look at another musician who got kicked out of another band. His story eerily
echoes that of Dave Mustaine, although it happened two decades earlier.
It was 1962 and there was a buzz around an up-and-coming band from Liverpool, England. This
band had funny haircuts and an even funnier name, but their music was undeniably good, and the
record industry was finally taking notice.
There was John, the lead singer and songwriter; Paul, the boyish-faced romantic bass player;
George, the rebellious lead guitar player. And then there was the drummer.
He was considered the best-looking of the bunch—the girls all went wild for him, and it was his
face that began to appear in the magazines first. He was the most professional member of the group
too. He didn’t do drugs. He had a steady girlfriend. There were even a few people in suits and ties
who thought he should be the face of the band, not John or Paul.
His name was Pete Best. And in 1962, after landing their first record contract, the other three
members of the Beatles quietly got together and asked their manager, Brian Epstein, to fire him.
Epstein agonized over the decision. He liked Pete, so he put it off, hoping the other three guys would
change their minds.
Months later, a mere three days before the recording of the first record began, Epstein finally
called Best to his office. There, the manager unceremoniously told him to piss off and find another
band. He gave no reason, no explanation, no condolences—just told him that the other guys wanted
him out of the group, so, uh, best of luck.
As a replacement, the band brought in some oddball named Ringo Starr. Ringo was older and had
a big, funny nose. Ringo agreed to get the same ugly haircut as John, Paul, and George, and insisted on
writing songs about octopuses and submarines. The other guys said, Sure, fuck it, why not?
Within six months of Best’s firing, Beatlemania had erupted, making John, Paul, George, and Pete
Ringo arguably four of the most famous faces on the entire planet.
Meanwhile, Best understandably fell into a deep depression and spent a lot of time doing what
any Englishman will do if you give him a reason to: drink.
The rest of the sixties were not kind to Pete Best. By 1965, he had sued two of the Beatles for
slander, and all of his other musical projects had failed horribly. In 1968, he attempted suicide, only
to be talked out of it by his mother. His life was a wreck.
Best didn’t have the same redemptive story Dave Mustaine did. He never became a global
superstar or made millions of dollars. Yet, in many ways, Best ended up better off than Mustaine. In
an interview in 1994, Best said, “I’m happier than I would have been with the Beatles.”
What the hell?
Best explained that the circumstances of his getting kicked out of the Beatles ultimately led him to
meet his wife. And then his marriage led him to having children. His values changed. He began to
measure his life differently. Fame and glory would have been nice, sure—but he decided that what he
already had was more important: a big and loving family, a stable marriage, a simple life. He even
still got to play drums, touring Europe and recording albums well into the 2000s. So what was really
lost? Just a lot of attention and adulation, whereas what was gained meant so much more to him.
These stories suggest that some values and metrics are better than others. Some lead to good
---
problems that are easily and regularly solved. Others lead to bad problems that are not easily and
regularly solved.
Shitty Values
There are a handful of common values that create really poor problems for people—problems that
can hardly be solved. So let’s go over some of them quickly:
1. Pleasure. Pleasure is great, but it’s a horrible value to prioritize your life around. Ask any drug
addict how his pursuit of pleasure turned out. Ask an adulterer who shattered her family and lost
her children whether pleasure ultimately made her happy. Ask a man who almost ate himself to
death how pleasure helped him solve his problems.
 Pleasure is a false god. Research shows that people who focus their energy on
superficial pleasures end up more anxious, more emotionally unstable, and more depressed.
Pleasure is the most superficial form of life satisfaction and therefore the easiest to obtain and
the easiest to lose.
 And yet, pleasure is what’s marketed to us, twenty-four/seven. It’s what we fixate
on. It’s what we use to numb and distract ourselves. But pleasure, while necessary in life (in
certain doses), isn’t, by itself, sufficient.
 Pleasure is not the cause of happiness; rather, it is the effect. If you get the other stuff
right (the other values and metrics), then pleasure will naturally occur as a by-product.
2. Material Success. Many people measure their self-worth based on how much money they make or
what kind of car they drive or whether their front lawn is greener and prettier than the next-door
neighbor’s.
 Research shows that once one is able to provide for basic physical needs (food,
shelter, and so on), the correlation between happiness and worldly success quickly approaches
zero. So if you’re starving and living on the street in the middle of India, an extra ten thousand
dollars a year would affect your happiness a lot. But if you’re sitting pretty in the middle class in
a developed country, an extra ten thousand dollars per year won’t affect anything much—
meaning that you’re killing yourself working overtime and weekends for basically nothing.
 The other issue with overvaluing material success is the danger of prioritizing it
over other values, such as honesty, nonviolence, and compassion. When people measure
themselves not by their behavior, but by the status symbols they’re able to collect, then not only
are they shallow, but they’re probably assholes as well.
3. Always Being Right.Our brains are inefficient machines. We consistently make poor assumptions,
misjudge probabilities, misremember facts, give in to cognitive biases, and make decisions based
on our emotional whims. As humans, we’re wrong pretty much constantly, so if your metric for
life success is to be right—well, you’re going to have a difficult time rationalizing all of the
bullshit to yourself.
The fact is, people who base their self-worth on being right about everything prevent
themselves from learning from their mistakes. They lack the ability to take on new perspectives
and empathize with others. They close themselves off to new and important information.
It’s far more helpful to assume that you’re ignorant and don’t know a whole lot. This keeps
you unattached to superstitious or poorly informed beliefs and promotes a constant state of
learning and growth.
4. Staying Positive. Then there are those who measure their lives by the ability to be positive about,
well, pretty much everything. Lost your job? Great! That’s an opportunity to explore your
passions. Husband cheated on you with your sister? Well, at least you’re learning what you really
mean to the people around you. Child dying of throat cancer? At least you don’t have to pay for
college anymore!
While there is something to be said for “staying on the sunny side of life,” the truth is,
sometimes life sucks, and the healthiest thing you can do is admit it.
Denying negative emotions leads to experiencing deeper and more prolonged negative
emotions and to emotional dysfunction. Constant positivity is a form of avoidance, not a valid
solution to life’s problems—problems which, by the way, if you’re choosing the right values and
metrics, should be invigorating you and motivating you.
It’s simple, really: things go wrong, people upset us, accidents happen. These things make us
feel like shit. And that’s fine. Negative emotions are a necessary component of emotional health.
To deny that negativity is to perpetuate problems rather than solve them.
The trick with negative emotions is to 1) express them in a socially acceptable and healthy
manner and 2) express them in a way that aligns with your values. Simple example: A value of
mine is nonviolence. Therefore, when I get mad at somebody, I express that anger, but I also make
a point of not punching them in the face. Radical idea, I know. But the anger is not the problem.
Anger is natural. Anger is a part of life. Anger is arguably quite healthy in many situations.
(Remember, emotions are just feedback.)
See, it’s the punching people in the face that’s the problem. Not the anger. The anger is merely
the messenger for my fist in your face. Don’t blame the messenger. Blame my fist (or your face).
When we force ourselves to stay positive at all times, we deny the existence of our life’s
problems. And when we deny our problems, we rob ourselves of the chance to solve them and
generate happiness. Problems add a sense of meaning and importance to our life. Thus to duck our
problems is to lead a meaningless (even if supposedly pleasant) existence.
In the long run, completing a marathon makes us happier than eating a chocolate cake. Raising a
child makes us happier than beating a video game. Starting a small business with friends while
struggling to make ends meet makes us happier than buying a new computer. These activities are
stressful, arduous, and often unpleasant. They also require withstanding problem after problem. Yet
they are some of the most meaningful moments and joyous things we’ll ever do. They involve pain,
struggle, even anger and despair—yet once they’re accomplished, we look back and get all mistyeyed
telling our grandkids about them.
As Freud once said, “One day, in retrospect, the years of struggle will strike you as the most
beautiful.”
This is why these values—pleasure, material success, always being right, staying positive—are
poor ideals for a person’s life. Some of the greatest moments of one’s life are not pleasant, not
successful, not known, and not positive.
The point is to nail down some good values and metrics, and pleasure and success will naturally
emerge as a result. These things are side effects of good values. By themselves, they are empty highs.
Defining Good and Bad Values
Good values are 1) reality-based, 2) socially constructive, and 3) immediate and controllable.
Bad values are 1) superstitious, 2) socially destructive, and 3) not immediate or controllable.
Honesty is a good value because it’s something you have complete control over, it reflects reality,
and it benefits others (even if it’s sometimes unpleasant). Popularity, on the other hand, is a bad value.
If that’s your value, and if your metric is being the most popular guy/girl at the dance party, much of
what happens will be out of your control: you don’t know who else will be at the event, and you
probably won’t know who half those people are. Second, the value/metric isn’t based on reality: you
may feel popular or unpopular, when in fact you have no fucking clue what anybody else really thinks
about you. (Side Note: As a rule, people who are terrified of what others think about them are
actually terrified of all the shitty things they think about themselves being reflected back at them.)
Some examples of good, healthy values: honesty, innovation, vulnerability, standing up for
oneself, standing up for others, self-respect, curiosity, charity, humility, creativity.
Some examples of bad, unhealthy values: dominance through manipulation or violence,
indiscriminate fucking, feeling good all the time, always being the center of attention, not being alone,
being liked by everybody, being rich for the sake of being rich, sacrificing small animals to the pagan
gods.
You’ll notice that good, healthy values are achieved internally. Something like creativity or
humility can be experienced right now. You simply have to orient your mind in a certain way to
experience it. These values are immediate and controllable and engage you with the world as it is
rather than how you wish it were.
Bad values are generally reliant on external events—flying in a private jet, being told you’re right
all the time, owning a house in the Bahamas, eating a cannoli while getting blown by three strippers.
Bad values, while sometimes fun or pleasurable, lie outside of your control and often require socially
destructive or superstitious means to achieve.
Values are about prioritization. Everybody would love a good cannoli or a house in the Bahamas.
The question is your priorities. What are the values that you prioritize above everything else, and that
therefore influence your decision-making more than anything else?
Hiroo Onoda’s highest value was complete loyalty and service to the Japanese empire. This
value, in case you couldn’t tell from reading about him, stank worse than a rotten sushi roll. It created
really shitty problems for Hiroo—namely, he got stuck on a remote island where he lived off bugs and
worms for thirty years. Oh, and he felt compelled to murder innocent civilians too. So despite the fact
that Hiroo saw himself as a success, and despite the fact he lived up to his metrics, I think we can all
agree that his life really sucked—none of us would trade shoes with him given the opportunity, nor
would we commend his actions.
Dave Mustaine achieved great fame and glory and felt like a failure anyway. This is because he’d
adopted a crappy value based on some arbitrary comparison to the success of others. This value gave
him awful problems such as, “I need to sell 150 million more records; then everything will be great,”
and “My next tour needs to be nothing but stadiums”—problems he thought he needed to solve in
order to be happy. It’s no surprise that he wasn’t.
On the contrary, Pete Best pulled a switcheroo. Despite being depressed and distraught by getting
kicked out of the Beatles, as he grew older he learned to reprioritize what he cared about and was
able to measure his life in a new light. Because of this, Best grew into a happy and healthy old man,
with an easy life and great family—things that, ironically, the four Beatles would spend decades
struggling to achieve or maintain.
When we have poor values—that is, poor standards we set for ourselves and others—we are
essentially giving fucks about the things that don’t matter, things that in fact make our life worse. But
when we choose better values, we are able to divert our fucks to something better—toward things that
matter, things that improve the state of our well-being and that generate happiness, pleasure, and
success as side effects.
This, in a nutshell, is what “self-improvement” is really about: prioritizing better values, choosing
better things to give a fuck about. Because when you give better fucks, you get better problems. And
when you get better problems, you get a better life.
The rest of this book is dedicated to five counterintuitive values that I believe are the most
beneficial values one can adopt. All follow the “backwards law” we talked about earlier, in that
they’re “negative.” All require confronting deeper problems rather than avoiding them through highs.
These five values are both unconventional and uncomfortable. But, to me, they are life-changing.
The first, which we’ll look at in the next chapter, is a radical form of responsibility: taking
responsibility for everything that occurs in your life, regardless of who’s at fault. The second is
uncertainty: the acknowledgement of your own ignorance and the cultivation of constant doubt in your
own beliefs. The next is failure: the willingness to discover your own flaws and mistakes so that they
may be improved upon. The fourth is rejection: the ability to both say and hear no, thus clearly
defining what you will and will not accept in your life. The final value is the contemplation of one’s
own mortality; this one is crucial, because paying vigilant attention to one’s own death is perhaps the
only thing capable of helping us keep all our other values in proper perspective.
CHAPTER 5
You Are Always Choosing
Imagine that somebody puts a gun to your head and tells you that you have to run 26.2 miles in under
five hours, or else he’ll kill you and your entire family.
That would suck.
Now imagine that you bought nice shoes and running gear, trained religiously for months, and
completed your first marathon with all of your closest family and friends cheering you on at the finish
line.
That could potentially be one of the proudest moments of your life.
Exact same 26.2 miles. Exact same person running them. Exact same pain coursing through your
exact same legs. But when you chose it freely and prepared for it, it was a glorious and important
milestone in your life. When it was forced upon you against your will, it was one of the most
terrifying and painful experiences of your life.
Often the only difference between a problem being painful or being powerful is a sense that we
chose it, and that we are responsible for it.
If you’re miserable in your current situation, chances are it’s because you feel like some part of it
is outside your control—that there’s a problem you have no ability to solve, a problem that was
somehow thrust upon you without your choosing.
When we feel that we’re choosing our problems, we feel empowered. When we feel that our
problems are being forced upon us against our will, we feel victimized and miserable.
The Choice
William James had problems. Really bad problems.
Although born into a wealthy and prominent family, from birth James suffered life-threatening
health issues: an eye problem that left him temporarily blinded as a child; a terrible stomach
condition that caused excessive vomiting and forced him to adopt an obscure and highly sensitive
diet; trouble with his hearing; back spasms so bad that for days at a time he often couldn’t sit or stand
upright.
Due to his health problems, James spent most of his time at home. He didn’t have many friends,
and he wasn’t particularly good at school. Instead, he passed the days painting. That was the only
thing he liked and the only thing he felt particularly good at.
Unfortunately, nobody else thought he was good at it. When he grew to adulthood, nobody bought
his work. And as the years dragged on, his father (a wealthy businessman) began ridiculing him for
his laziness and his lack of talent.
Meanwhile, his younger brother, Henry James, went on to become a world-renowned novelist; his
sister, Alice James, made a good living as a writer as well. William was the family oddball, the
black sheep.
In a desperate attempt to salvage the young man’s future, James’s father used his business
connections to get him admitted into Harvard Medical School. It was his last chance, his father told
him. If he screwed this up, there was no hope for him.
But James never felt at home or at peace at Harvard. Medicine never appealed to him. He spent
the whole time feeling like a fake and a fraud. After all, if he couldn’t overcome his own problems,
how could he ever hope to have the energy to help others with theirs? After touring a psychiatric
facility one day, James mused in his diary that he felt he had more in common with the patients than
with the doctors.
A few years went by and, again to his father’s disapproval, James dropped out of medical school.
But rather than deal with the brunt of his father’s wrath, he decided to get away: he signed up to join
an anthropological expedition to the Amazon rain forest.
This was in the 1860s, so transcontinental travel was difficult and dangerous. If you ever played
the computer game Oregon Trail when you were a kid, it was kind of like that, with the dysentery and
drowning oxen and everything.
Anyway, James made it all the way to the Amazon, where the real adventure was to begin.
Surprisingly, his fragile health held up that whole way. But once he finally made it, on the first day of
the expedition, he promptly contracted smallpox and nearly died in the jungle.
Then his back spasms returned, painful to the point of making James unable to walk. By this time,
he was emaciated and starved from the smallpox, immobilized by his bad back, and left alone in the
middle of South America (the rest of the expedition having gone on without him) with no clear way to
get home—a journey that would take months and likely kill him anyway.
But somehow he eventually made it back to New England, where he was greeted by an (even
more) disappointed father. By this point the young man wasn’t so young anymore—nearly thirty years
old, still unemployed, a failure at everything he had attempted, with a body that routinely betrayed
him and wasn’t likely to ever get better. Despite all the advantages and opportunities he’d been given
in life, everything had fallen apart. The only constants in his life seemed to be suffering and
disappointment. James fell into a deep depression and began making plans to take his own life.
But one night, while reading lectures by the philosopher Charles Peirce, James decided to
conduct a little experiment. In his diary, he wrote that he would spend one year believing that he was
100 percent responsible for everything that occurred in his life, no matter what. During this period, he
would do everything in his power to change his circumstances, no matter the likelihood of failure. If
nothing improved in that year, then it would be apparent that he was truly powerless to the
circumstances around him, and then he would take his own life.
The punch line? William James went on to become the father of American psychology. His work
has been translated into a bazillion languages, and he’s regarded as one of the most influential
intellectuals/philosophers/psychologists of his generation. He would go on to teach at Harvard and
would tour much of the United States and Europe giving lectures. He would marry and have five
children (one of whom, Henry, would become a famous biographer and win a Pulitzer Prize). James
would later refer to his little experiment as his “rebirth,” and would credit it with everything that he
later accomplished in his life.
There is a simple realization from which all personal improvement and growth emerges. This is
the realization that we, individually, are responsible for everything in our lives, no matter the external
circumstances.
We don’t always control what happens to us. But we always control how we interpret what
happens to us, as well as how we respond.
Whether we consciously recognize it or not, we are always responsible for our experiences. It’s
impossible not to be. Choosing to not consciously interpret events in our lives is still an
interpretation of the events of our lives. Choosing to not respond to the events in our lives is still a
response to the events in our lives. Even if you get run over by a clown car and pissed on by a
busload of schoolchildren, it’s still your responsibility to interpret the meaning of the event and
choose a response.
Whether we like it or not, we are always taking an active role in what’s occurring to and within
us. We are always interpreting the meaning of every moment and every occurrence. We are always
choosing the values by which we live and the metrics by which we measure everything that happens
to us. Often the same event can be good or bad, depending on the metric we choose to use.
The point is, we are always choosing, whether we recognize it or not. Always.
It comes back to how, in reality, there is no such thing as not giving a single fuck. It’s impossible.
We must all give a fuck about something. To not give a fuck about anything is still to give a fuck about
something.
The real question is, What are we choosing to give a fuck about? What values are we choosing to
base our actions on? What metrics are we choosing to use to measure our life? And are those good
choices—good values and good metrics?
The Responsibility/Fault Fallacy
Years ago, when I was much younger and stupider, I wrote a blog post, and at the end of it I said
something like, “And as a great philosopher once said: ‘With great power comes great
responsibility.’” It sounded nice and authoritative. I couldn’t remember who had said it, and my
Google search had turned up nothing, but I stuck it in there anyway. It fit the post nicely.
About ten minutes later, the first comment came in: “I think the ‘great philosopher’ you’re
referring to is Uncle Ben from the movie Spider-Man.”
As another great philosopher once said, “Doh!”
“With great power comes great responsibility.” The last words of Uncle Ben before a thief whom
Peter Parker let get away murders him on a sidewalk full of people for absolutely no explicable
reason. That great philosopher.
Still, we’ve all heard the quote. It gets repeated a lot—usually ironically and after about seven
beers. It’s one of those perfect quotes that sound really intelligent, and yet it’s basically just telling
you what you already know, even if you’ve never quite thought about the matter before.
“With great power comes great responsibility.”
It is true. But there’s a better version of this quote, a version that actually is profound, and all you
have to do is switch the nouns around: “With great responsibility comes great power.”
The more we choose to accept responsibility in our lives, the more power we will exercise over
our lives. Accepting responsibility for our problems is thus the first step to solving them.
I once knew a man who was convinced that the reason no woman would date him was because he
was too short. He was educated, interesting, and good-looking—a good catch, in principle—but he
was absolutely convinced that women found him too short to date.
And because he felt that he was too short, he didn’t often go out and try to meet women. The few
times he did, he would home in on the smallest behaviors from any woman he talked with that could
possibly indicate he wasn’t attractive enough for her and then convince himself that she didn’t like
him, even if she really did. As you can imagine, his dating life sucked.
What he didn’t realize was that he had chosen the value that was hurting him: height. Women, he
assumed, are attracted only to height. He was screwed, no matter what he did.
This choice of value was disempowering. It gave this man a really crappy problem: not being tall
enough in a world meant (in his view) for tall people. There are far better values that he could have
adopted in his dating life. “I want to date only women who like me for who I am” might have been a
nice place to start—a metric that assesses the values of honesty and acceptance. But he did not choose
these values. He likely wasn’t even aware that he was choosing his value (or could do so). Even
though he didn’t realize it, he was responsible for his own problems.
Despite that responsibility, he went on complaining: “But I don’t have a choice,” he would tell the
bartender. “There’s nothing I can do! Women are superficial and vain and will never like me!” Yes,
it’s every single woman’s fault for not liking a self-pitying, shallow guy with shitty values.
Obviously.
A lot of people hesitate to take responsibility for their problems because they believe that to be
responsible for your problems is to also be at fault for your problems.
Responsibility and fault often appear together in our culture. But they’re not the same thing. If I hit
you with my car, I am both at fault and likely legally responsible to compensate you in some way.
Even if hitting you with my car was an accident, I am still responsible. This is the way fault works in
our society: if you fuck up, you’re on the hook for making it right. And it should be that way.
But there are also problems that we aren’t at fault for, yet we are still responsible for them.
For example, if you woke up one day and there was a newborn baby on your doorstep, it would
not be your fault that the baby had been put there, but the baby would now be your responsibility. You
would have to choose what to do. And whatever you ended up choosing (keeping it, getting rid of it,
ignoring it, feeding it to a pit bull), there would be problems associated with your choice—and you
would be responsible for those as well.
Judges don’t get to choose their cases. When a case goes to court, the judge assigned to it did not
commit the crime, was not a witness to the crime, and was not affected by the crime, but he or she is
still responsible for the crime. The judge must then choose the consequences; he or she must identify
the metric against which the crime will be measured and make sure that the chosen metric is carried
out.
We are responsible for experiences that aren’t our fault all the time. This is part of life.
Here’s one way to think about the distinction between the two concepts. Fault is past tense.
Responsibility is present tense. Fault results from choices that have already been made.
Responsibility results from the choices you’re currently making, every second of every day. You are
choosing to read this. You are choosing to think about the concepts. You are choosing to accept or
reject the concepts. It may be my fault that you think my ideas are lame, but you are responsible for
coming to your own conclusions. It’s not your fault that I chose to write this sentence, but you are still
responsible for choosing to read it (or not).
There’s a difference between blaming someone else for your situation and that person’s actually
being responsible for your situation. Nobody else is ever responsible for your situation but you. Many
people may be to blame for your unhappiness, but nobody is ever responsible for your unhappiness
but you. This is because you always get to choose how you see things, how you react to things, how
you value things. You always get to choose the metric by which to measure your experiences.
My first girlfriend dumped me in spectacular fashion. She was cheating on me with her teacher. It
was awesome. And by awesome, I mean it felt like getting punched in the stomach about 253 times.
To make things worse, when I confronted her about it, she promptly left me for him. Three years
together, down the toilet just like that.
I was miserable for months afterward. That was to be expected. But I also held her responsible
for my misery. Which, take it from me, didn’t get me very far. It just made the misery worse.
See, I couldn’t control her. No matter how many times I called her, or screamed at her, or begged
her to take me back, or made surprise visits to her place, or did other creepy and irrational exboyfriend
things, I could never control her emotions or her actions. Ultimately, while she was to
blame for how I felt, she was never responsible for how I felt. I was.
At some point, after enough tears and alcohol, my thinking began to shift and I began to understand
that although she had done something horrible to me and she could be blamed for that, it was now my
own responsibility to make myself happy again. She was never going to pop up and fix things for me.
I had to fix them for myself.
When I took that approach, a few things happened. First, I began to improve myself. I started
exercising and spending more time with my friends (whom I had been neglecting). I started
deliberately meeting new people. I took a big study-abroad trip and did some volunteer work. And
slowly, I started to feel better.
I still resented my ex for what she had done. But at least now I was taking responsibility for my
own emotions. And by doing so, I was choosing better values—values aimed at taking care of myself,
learning to feel better about myself, rather than aimed at getting her to fix what she’d broken.
(By the way, this whole “holding her responsible for my emotions” thing is probably part of why
she left in the first place. More on that in a couple chapters.)
Then, about a year later, something funny began to happen. As I looked back on our relationship, I
started to notice problems I had never noticed before, problems that I was to blame for and that I
could have done something to solve. I realized that it was likely that I hadn’t been a great boyfriend,
and that people don’t just magically cheat on somebody they’ve been with unless they are unhappy for
some reason.
I’m not saying that this excused what my ex did—not at all. But recognizing my mistakes helped
me to realize that I perhaps hadn’t been the innocent victim I’d believed myself to be. That I had a
role to play in enabling the shitty relationship to continue for as long as it did. After all, people who
date each other tend to have similar values. And if I dated someone with shitty values for that long,
what did that say about me and my values? I learned the hard way that if the people in your
relationships are selfish and doing hurtful things, it’s likely you are too, you just don’t realize it.
In hindsight, I was able to look back and see warning signs of my ex-girlfriend’s character, signs I
had chosen to ignore or brush off when I was with her. That was my fault. I could look back and see
that I hadn’t exactly been the Boyfriend of the Year to her either. In fact, I had often been cold and
arrogant toward her; other times I took her for granted and blew her off and hurt her. These things
were my fault too.
Did my mistakes justify her mistake? No. But still, I took on the responsibility of never making
those same mistakes again, and never overlooking the same signs again, to help guarantee that I will
never suffer the same consequences again. I took on the responsibility of striving to make my future
relationships with women that much better. And I’m happy to report that I have. No more cheating
girlfriends leaving me, no more 253 stomach punches. I took responsibility for my problems and
improved upon them. I took responsibility for my role in that unhealthy relationship and improved
upon it with later relationships.
And you know what? My ex leaving me, while one of the most painful experiences I’ve ever had,
was also one of the most important and influential experiences of my life. I credit it with inspiring a
significant amount of personal growth. I learned more from that single problem than dozens of my
successes combined.
We all love to take responsibility for success and happiness. Hell, we often fight over who gets to
be responsible for success and happiness. But taking responsibility for our problems is far more
important, because that’s where the real learning comes from. That’s where the real-life improvement
comes from. To simply blame others is only to hurt yourself.
Responding to Tragedy
But what about really awful events? A lot of people can get on board with taking responsibility for
work-related problems and maybe watching too much TV when they should really be playing with
their kids or being productive. But when it comes to horrible tragedies, they pull the emergency cord
on the responsibility train and get off when it stops. Some things just feel too painful for them to own
up to.
But think about it: the intensity of the event doesn’t change the underlying truth. If you get robbed,
say, you’re obviously not at fault for being robbed. No one would ever choose to go through that. But
as with the baby on your doorstep, you are immediately thrust into responsibility for a life-and-death
situation. Do you fight back? Do you panic? Do you freeze up? Do you tell the police? Do you try to
forget it and pretend it never happened? These are all choices and reactions you’re responsible for
making or rejecting. You didn’t choose the robbery, but it’s still your responsibility to manage the
emotional and psychological (and legal) fallout of the experience.
In 2008, the Taliban took control of the Swat Valley, a remote part of northeastern Pakistan. They
quickly implemented their Muslim extremist agenda. No television. No films. No women outside the
house without a male escort. No girls attending school.
By 2009, an eleven-year-old Pakistani girl named Malala Yousafzai had begun to speak out
against the school ban. She continued to attend her local school, risking both her and her father’s
lives; she also attended conferences in nearby cities. She wrote online, “How dare the Taliban take
away my right for education?”
In 2012, at the age of fourteen, she was shot in the face as she rode the bus home from school one
day. A masked Taliban soldier armed with a rifle boarded the bus and asked, “Who is Malala? Tell
me, or I will shoot everyone here.” Malala identified herself (an amazing choice in and of itself), and
the man shot her in the head in front of all the other passengers.
Malala went into a coma and almost died. The Taliban stated publicly that if she somehow
survived the attempt, they would kill both her and her father.
Today, Malala is still alive. She still speaks out against violence and oppression toward women
in Muslim countries, now as a best-selling author. In 2014 she received the Nobel Peace Prize for her
efforts. It would seem that being shot in the face only gave her a larger audience and more courage
than before. It would have been easy for her to lie down and say, “I can’t do anything,” or “I have no
choice.” That, ironically, would still have been her choice. But she chose the opposite.
A few years ago, I had written about some of the ideas in this chapter on my blog, and a man left a
comment. He said that I was shallow and superficial, adding that I had no real understanding of life’s
problems or human responsibility. He said that his son had recently died in a car accident. He
accused me of not knowing what true pain was and said that I was an asshole for suggesting that he
himself was responsible for the pain he felt over his son’s death.
This man had obviously suffered pain much greater than most people ever have to confront in their
lives. He didn’t choose for his son to die, nor was it his fault that his son died. The responsibility for
coping with that loss was given to him even though it was clearly and understandably unwanted. But
despite all that, he was still responsible for his own emotions, beliefs, and actions. How he reacted to
his son’s death was his own choice. Pain of one sort or another is inevitable for all of us, but we get
to choose what it means to and for us. Even in claiming that he had no choice in the matter and simply
wanted his son back, he was making a choice—one of many ways he could have chosen to use that
pain.
Of course, I didn’t say any of this to him. I was too busy being horrified and thinking that yes,
perhaps I was way in over my head and had no idea what the fuck I was talking about. That’s a hazard
that comes with my line of work. A problem that I chose. And a problem that I was responsible for
dealing with.
At first, I felt awful. But then, after a few minutes, I began to get angry. His objections had little to
do with what I was actually saying, I told myself. And what the hell? Just because I don’t have a kid
who died doesn’t mean I haven’t experienced terrible pain myself.
But then I actually applied my own advice. I chose my problem. I could get mad at this man and
argue with him, try to “outpain” him with my own pain, which would just make us both look stupid
and insensitive. Or I could choose a better problem, working on practicing patience, understanding
my readers better, and keeping that man in mind every time I wrote about pain and trauma from then
on. And that’s what I’ve tried to do.
I replied simply that I was sorry for his loss and left it at that. What else can you say?
Genetics and the Hand We’re Dealt
In 2013, the BBC rounded up half a dozen teenagers with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and
followed them as they attended intensive therapies to help them overcome their unwanted thoughts
and repetitive behaviors.
There was Imogen, a seventeen-year-old girl who had a compulsive need to tap every surface she
walked past; if she failed to do so, she was flooded with horrible thoughts of her family dying. There
was Josh, who needed to do everything with both sides of his body—shake a person’s hand with both
his right and his left hand, eat his food with each hand, step through a doorway with both feet, and so
on. If he didn’t “equalize” his two sides, he suffered from severe panic attacks. And then there was
Jack, a classic germophobe who refused to leave his house without wearing gloves, boiled all his
water before drinking it, and refused to eat food not cleaned and prepared himself.
OCD is a terrible neurological and genetic disorder that cannot be cured. At best, it can be
managed. And, as we’ll see, managing the disorder comes down to managing one’s values.
The first thing the psychiatrists on this project do is tell the kids that they’re to accept the
imperfections of their compulsive desires. What that means, as one example, is that when Imogen
becomes flooded with horrible thoughts of her family dying, she is to accept that her family may
actually die and that there’s nothing she can do about it; simply put, she is told that what happens to
her is not her fault. Josh is forced to accept that over the long term, “equalizing” all of his behaviors
to make them symmetrical is actually destroying his life more than occasional panic attacks would.
And Jack is reminded that no matter what he does, germs are always present and always infecting
him.
The goal is to get the kids to recognize that their values are not rational—that in fact their values
are not even theirs, but rather are the disorder’s—and that by fulfilling these irrational values they are
actually harming their ability to function in life.
The next step is to encourage the kids to choose a value that is more important than their OCD
value and to focus on that. For Josh, it’s the possibility of not having to hide his disorder from his
friends and family all the time, the prospect of having a normal, functioning social life. For Imogen,
it’s the idea of taking control over her own thoughts and feelings and being happy again. And for Jack,
it’s the ability to leave his house for long periods of time without suffering traumatic episodes.
With these new values held front and center in their minds, the teenagers set out on intensive
desensitization exercises that force them to live out their new values. Panic attacks ensue; tears are
shed; Jack punches an array of inanimate objects and then immediately washes his hands. But by the
end of the documentary, major progress has been made. Imogen no longer needs to tap every surface
she comes across. She says, “There are still monsters in the back of my mind, and there probably
always will be, but they’re getting quieter now.” Josh is able to go periods of twenty-five to thirty
minutes without “equalizing” his behaviors between both sides of his body. And Jack, who makes
perhaps the most improvement, is actually able to go out to restaurants and drink out of bottles and
glasses without washing them first. Jack sums up well what he learned: “I didn’t choose this life; I
didn’t choose this horrible, horrible condition. But I get to choose how to live with it; I have to
choose how to live with it.”
A lot of people treat being born with a disadvantage, whether OCD or small stature or something
very different, as though they were screwed out of something highly valuable. They feel that there’s
nothing they can do about it, so they avoid responsibility for their situation. They figure, “I didn’t
choose my crappy genetics, so it’s not my fault if things go wrong.”
And it’s true, it’s not their fault.
But it’s still their responsibility.
Back in college, I had a bit of a delusional fantasy of becoming a professional poker player. I won
money and everything, and it was fun, but after almost a year of serious play, I quit. The lifestyle of
staying up all night staring at a computer screen, winning thousands of dollars one day and then losing
most of it the next, wasn’t for me, and it wasn’t exactly the most healthy or emotionally stable means
of earning a living. But my time playing poker had a surprisingly profound influence on the way I see
life.
The beauty of poker is that while luck is always involved, luck doesn’t dictate the long-term
results of the game. A person can get dealt terrible cards and beat someone who was dealt great
cards. Sure, the person who gets dealt great cards has a higher likelihood of winning the hand, but
ultimately the winner is determined by—yup, you guessed it—the choices each player makes
throughout play.
I see life in the same terms. We all get dealt cards. Some of us get better cards than others. And
while it’s easy to get hung up on our cards, and feel we got screwed over, the real game lies in the
choices we make with those cards, the risks we decide to take, and the consequences we choose to
live with. People who consistently make the best choices in the situations they’re given are the ones
who eventually come out ahead in poker, just as in life. And it’s not necessarily the people with the
best cards.
There are those who suffer psychologically and emotionally from neurological and/or genetic
deficiencies. But this changes nothing. Sure, they inherited a bad hand and are not to blame. No more
than the short guy wanting to get a date is to blame for being short. Or the person who got robbed is to
blame for being robbed. But it’s still their responsibility. Whether they choose to seek psychiatric
treatment, undergo therapy, or do nothing, the choice is ultimately theirs to make. There are those who
suffer through bad childhoods. There are those who are abused and violated and screwed over,
physically, emotionally, financially. They are not to blame for their problems and their hindrances, but
they are still responsible—always responsible—to move on despite their problems and to make the
best choices they can, given their circumstances.
And let’s be honest here. If you were to add up all of the people who have some psychiatric
disorder, struggle with depression or suicidal thoughts, have been subjected to neglect or abuse, have
dealt with tragedy or the death of a loved one, and have survived serious health issues, accidents, or
trauma—if you were to round up all of those people and put them in the room, well, you’d probably
have to round up everyone, because nobody makes it through life without collecting a few scars on the
way out.
Sure, some people get saddled with worse problems than others. And some people are
legitimately victimized in horrible ways. But as much as this may upset us or disturb us, it ultimately
changes nothing about the responsibility equation of our individual situation.
Victimhood Chic
The responsibility/fault fallacy allows people to pass off the responsibility for solving their problems
to others. This ability to alleviate responsibility through blame gives people a temporary high and a
feeling of moral righteousness.
Unfortunately, one side effect of the Internet and social media is that it’s become easier than ever
to push responsibility—for even the tiniest of infractions—onto some other group or person. In fact,
this kind of public blame/shame game has become popular; in certain crowds it’s even seen as
“cool.” The public sharing of “injustices” garners far more attention and emotional outpouring than
most other events on social media, rewarding people who are able to perpetually feel victimized with
ever-growing amounts of attention and sympathy.
“Victimhood chic” is in style on both the right and the left today, among both the rich and the poor.
In fact, this may be the first time in human history that every single demographic group has felt
unfairly victimized simultaneously. And they’re all riding the highs of the moral indignation that
comes along with it.
Right now, anyone who is offended about anything—whether it’s the fact that a book about
racism was assigned in a university class, or that Christmas trees were banned at the local mall, or
the fact that taxes were raised half a percent on investment funds—feels as though they’re being
oppressed in some way and therefore deserve to be outraged and to have a certain amount of
attention.
The current media environment both encourages and perpetuates these reactions because, after all,
it’s good for business. The writer and media commentator Ryan Holiday refers to this as “outrage
porn”: rather than report on real stories and real issues, the media find it much easier (and more
profitable) to find something mildly offensive, broadcast it to a wide audience, generate outrage, and
then broadcast that outrage back across the population in a way that outrages yet another part of the
population. This triggers a kind of echo of bullshit pinging back and forth between two imaginary
sides, meanwhile distracting everyone from real societal problems. It’s no wonder we’re more
politically polarized than ever before.
The biggest problem with victimhood chic is that it sucks attention away from actual victims. It’s
like the boy who cried wolf. The more people there are who proclaim themselves victims over tiny
infractions, the harder it becomes to see who the real victims actually are.
People get addicted to feeling offended all the time because it gives them a high; being selfrighteous
and morally superior feels good. As political cartoonist Tim Kreider put it in a New York
Times op-ed: “Outrage is like a lot of other things that feel good but over time devour us from the
inside out. And it’s even more insidious than most vices because we don’t even consciously
acknowledge that it’s a pleasure.”
But part of living in a democracy and a free society is that we all have to deal with views and
people we don’t necessarily like. That’s simply the price we pay—you could even say it’s the whole
point of the system. And it seems more and more people are forgetting that.
We should pick our battles carefully, while simultaneously attempting to empathize a bit with the
so-called enemy. We should approach the news and media with a healthy dose of skepticism and
avoid painting those who disagree with us with a broad brush. We should prioritize values of being
honest, fostering transparency, and welcoming doubt over the values of being right, feeling good, and
getting revenge. These “democratic” values are harder to maintain amidst the constant noise of a
networked world. But we must accept the responsibility and nurture them regardless. The future
stability of our political systems may depend on it.
There Is No “How”
A lot of people might hear all of this and then say something like, “Okay, but how? I get that my values
suck and that I avoid responsibility for all of my problems and that I’m an entitled little shit who
thinks the world should revolve around me and every inconvenience I experience—but how do I
change?”
And to this I say, in my best Yoda impersonation: “Do, or do not; there is no ‘how.’ ”
You are already choosing, in every moment of every day, what to give a fuck about, so change is
as simple as choosing to give a fuck about something else.
It really is that simple. It’s just not easy.
It’s not easy because you’re going to feel like a loser, a fraud, a dumbass at first. You’re going to
be nervous. You’re going to freak out. You may get pissed off at your wife or your friends or your
father in the process. These are all side effects of changing your values, of changing the fucks you’re
giving. But they are inevitable.
It’s simple but really, really hard.
Let’s look at some of these side effects. You’re going to feel uncertain; I guarantee it. “Should I
really give this up? Is this the right thing to do?” Giving up a value you’ve depended on for years is
going to feel disorienting, as if you don’t really know right from wrong anymore. This is hard, but it’s
normal.
Next, you’ll feel like a failure. You’ve spent half your life measuring yourself by that old value, so
when you change your priorities, change your metrics, and stop behaving in the same way, you’ll fail
to meet that old, trusted metric and thus immediately feel like some sort of fraud or nobody. This is
also normal and also uncomfortable.
And certainly you will weather rejections. Many of the relationships in your life were built
around the values you’ve been keeping, so the moment you change those values—the moment you
decide that studying is more important than partying, that getting married and having a family is more
important than rampant sex, that working a job you believe in is more important than money—your
turnaround will reverberate out through your relationships, and many of them will blow up in your
face. This too is normal and this too will be uncomfortable.
These are necessary, though painful, side effects of choosing to place your fucks elsewhere, in a
place far more important and more worthy of your energies. As you reassess your values, you will be
met with internal and external resistance along the way. More than anything, you will feel uncertain;
you will wonder if what you’re doing is wrong.
But as we’ll see, this is a good thing.
CHAPTER 6
You’re Wrong About Everything (But So Am I)
Five hundred years ago cartographers believed that California was an island. Doctors believed that
slicing a person’s arm open (or causing bleeding anywhere) could cure disease. Scientists believed
that fire was made out of something called phlogiston. Women believed that rubbing dog urine on
their face had anti-aging benefits. Astronomers believed that the sun revolved around the earth.
When I was a little boy, I used to think “mediocre” was a kind of vegetable that I didn’t want to
eat. I thought my brother had found a secret passageway in my grandmother’s house because he could
get outside without having to leave the bathroom (spoiler alert: there was a window). I also thought
that when my friend and his family visited “Washington, B.C.,” they had somehow traveled back in
time to when the dinosaurs lived, because after all, “B.C.” was a long time ago.
As a teenager, I told everybody that I didn’t care about anything, when the truth was I cared about
way too much. Other people ruled my world without my even knowing. I thought happiness was a
destiny and not a choice. I thought love was something that just happened, not something that you
worked for. I thought being “cool” had to be practiced and learned from others, rather than invented
for oneself.
When I was with my first girlfriend, I thought we would be together forever. And then, when that
relationship ended, I thought I’d never feel the same way about a woman again. And then when I felt
the same way about a woman again, I thought that love sometimes just wasn’t enough. And then I
realized that each individual gets to decide what is “enough,” and that love can be whatever we let it
be.
Every step of the way I was wrong. About everything. Throughout my life, I’ve been flat-out
wrong about myself, others, society, culture, the world, the universe—everything.
And I hope that will continue to be the case for the rest of my life.
Just as Present Mark can look back on Past Mark’s every flaw and mistake, one day Future Mark
will look back on Present Mark’s assumptions (including the contents of this book) and notice similar
flaws. And that will be a good thing. Because that will mean I have grown.
There’s a famous Michael Jordan quote about him failing over and over and over again, and that’s
why he succeeded. Well, I’m always wrong about everything, over and over and over again, and
that’s why my life improves.
Growth is an endlessly iterative process. When we learn something new, we don’t go from
“wrong” to “right.” Rather, we go from wrong to slightly less wrong. And when we learn something
additional, we go from slightly less wrong to slightly less wrong than that, and then to even less
wrong than that, and so on. We are always in the process of approaching truth and perfection without
actually ever reaching truth or perfection.
We shouldn’t seek to find the ultimate “right” answer for ourselves, but rather, we should seek to
chip away at the ways that we’re wrong today so that we can be a little less wrong tomorrow.
When viewed from this perspective, personal growth can actually be quite scientific. Our values
are our hypotheses: this behavior is good and important; that other behavior is not. Our actions are the
experiments; the resulting emotions and thought patterns are our data.
There is no correct dogma or perfect ideology. There is only what your experience has shown you
to be right for you—and even then, that experience is probably somewhat wrong too. And because
you and I and everybody else all have differing needs and personal histories and life circumstances,
we will all inevitably come to differing “correct” answers about what our lives mean and how they
should be lived. My correct answer involves traveling alone for years on end, living in obscure
places, and laughing at my own farts. Or at least that was the correct answer up until recently. That
answer will change and evolve, because I change and evolve; and as I grow older and more
experienced, I chip away at how wrong I am, becoming less and less wrong every day.
Many people become so obsessed with being “right” about their life that they never end up
actually living it.
A certain woman is single and lonely and wants a partner, but she never gets out of the house and
does anything about it. A certain man works his ass off and believes he deserves a promotion, but he
never explicitly says that to his boss.
They’re told that they’re afraid of failure, of rejection, of someone saying no.
But that’s not it. Sure, rejection hurts. Failure sucks. But there are particular certainties that we
hold on to—certainties that we’re afraid to question or let go of, values that have given our lives
meaning over the years. That woman doesn’t get out there and date because she would be forced to
confront her beliefs about her own desirability. That man doesn’t ask for the promotion because he
would have to confront his beliefs about what his skills are actually worth.
It’s easier to sit in a painful certainty that nobody would find you attractive, that nobody
appreciates your talents, than to actually test those beliefs and find out for sure.
Beliefs of this sort—that I’m not attractive enough, so why bother; or that my boss is an asshole,
so why bother—are designed to give us moderate comfort now by mortgaging greater happiness and
success later on. They’re terrible long-term strategies, yet we cling to them because we assume we’re
right, because we assume we already know what’s supposed to happen. In other words, we assume
we know how the story ends.
Certainty is the enemy of growth. Nothing is for certain until it has already happened—and even
then, it’s still debatable. That’s why accepting the inevitable imperfections of our values is necessary
for any growth to take place.
Instead of striving for certainty, we should be in constant search of doubt: doubt about our own
beliefs, doubt about our own feelings, doubt about what the future may hold for us unless we get out
there and create it for ourselves. Instead of looking to be right all the time, we should be looking for
how we’re wrong all the time. Because we are.
Being wrong opens us up to the possibility of change. Being wrong brings the opportunity for
growth. It means not cutting your arm open to cure a cold or splashing dog piss on your face to look
young again. It means not thinking “mediocre” is a vegetable, and not being afraid to care about
things.
Because here’s something that’s weird but true: we don’t actually know what a positive or
negative experience is. Some of the most difficult and stressful moments of our lives also end up
being the most formative and motivating. Some of the best and most gratifying experiences of our
lives are also the most distracting and demotivating. Don’t trust your conception of positive/negative
experiences. All that we know for certain is what hurts in the moment and what doesn’t. And that’s
not worth much.
Just as we look back in horror at the lives of people five hundred years ago, I imagine people five
hundred years from now will laugh at us and our certainties today. They will laugh at how we let our
money and our jobs define our lives. They will laugh at how we were afraid to show appreciation for
those who matter to us most, yet heaped praise on public figures who didn’t deserve anything. They
will laugh at our rituals and superstitions, our worries and our wars; they will gawk at our cruelty.
They will study our art and argue over our history. They will understand truths about us of which none
of us are yet aware.
And they, too, will be wrong. Just less wrong than we were.
Architects of Our Own Beliefs
Try this. Take a random person and put them in a room with some buttons to push. Then tell them that
if they do something specific—some undefined something that they have to figure out—a light will
flash on indicating that they’ve won a point. Then tell them to see how many points they can earn
within a thirty-minute period.
When psychologists have done this, what happens is what you might expect. People sit down and
start mashing buttons at random until eventually the light comes on to tell them they got a point.
Logically, they then try repeating whatever they were doing to get more points. Except now the light’s
not coming on. So they start experimenting with more complicated sequences—press this button three
times, then this button once, then wait five seconds, and—ding! Another point. But eventually that
stops working. Perhaps it doesn’t have to do with buttons at all, they think. Perhaps it has to do with
how I’m sitting. Or what I’m touching. Maybe it has to do with my feet. Ding! Another point. Yeah,
maybe it’s my feet and then I press another button. Ding!
Generally, within ten to fifteen minutes each person has figured out the specific sequence of
behaviors required to net more points. It’s usually something weird like standing on one foot or
memorizing a long sequence of buttons pressed in a specific amount of time while facing a certain
direction.
But here’s the funny part: the points really are random. There’s no sequence; there’s no pattern.
Just a light that keeps coming on with a ding, and people doing cartwheels thinking that what they’re
doing is giving them points.
Sadism aside, the point of the experiment is to show how quickly the human mind is capable of
coming up with and believing in a bunch of bullshit that isn’t real. And it turns out, we’re all really
good at it. Every person leaves that room convinced that he or she nailed the experiment and won the
game. They all believe that they discovered the “perfect” sequence of buttons that earned them their
points. But the methods they come up with are as unique as the individuals themselves. One man came
up with a long sequence of button-pushing that made no sense to anyone but himself. One girl came to
believe that she had to tap the ceiling a certain number of times to get points. When she left the room
she was exhausted from jumping up and down.
Our brains are meaning machines. What we understand as “meaning” is generated by the
associations our brain makes between two or more experiences. We press a button, then we see a
light go on; we assume the button caused the light to go on. This, at its core, is the basis of meaning.
Button, light; light, button. We see a chair. We note that it’s gray. Our brain then draws the association
between the color (gray) and the object (chair) and forms meaning: “The chair is gray.”
Our minds are constantly whirring, generating more and more associations to help us understand
and control the environment around us. Everything about our experiences, both external and internal,
generates new associations and connections within our minds. Everything from the words on this
page, to the grammatical concepts you use to decipher them, to the dirty thoughts your mind wanders
into when my writing becomes boring or repetitive—each of these thoughts, impulses, and
perceptions is composed of thousands upon thousands of neural connections, firing in conjunction,
alighting your mind in a blaze of knowledge and understanding.
But there are two problems. First, the brain is imperfect. We mistake things we see and hear. We
forget things or misinterpret events quite easily.
Second, once we create meaning for ourselves, our brains are designed to hold on to that meaning.
We are biased toward the meaning our mind has made, and we don’t want to let go of it. Even if we
see evidence that contradicts the meaning we created, we often ignore it and keep on believing
anyway.
The comedian Emo Philips once said, “I used to think the human brain was the most wonderful
organ in my body. Then I realized who was telling me this.” The unfortunate fact is, most of what we
come to “know” and believe is the product of the innate inaccuracies and biases present in our brains.
Many or even most of our values are products of events that are not representative of the world at
large, or are the result of a totally misconceived past.
The result of all this? Most of our beliefs are wrong. Or, to be more exact, all beliefs are wrong
—some are just less wrong than others. The human mind is a jumble of inaccuracy. And while this
may make you uncomfortable, it’s an incredibly important concept to accept, as we’ll see.
Be Careful What You Believe
In 1988, while in therapy, the journalist and feminist author Meredith Maran came to a startling
realization: her father had sexually abused her as a child. It was a shock to her, a repressed memory
she had spent most of her adult life oblivious to. But at the age of thirty-seven, she confronted her
father and also told her family what had happened.
Meredith’s news horrified her entire family. Her father immediately denied having done anything.
Some family members sided with Meredith. Others sided with her father. The family tree was split in
two. And the pain that had defined Meredith’s relationship with her father since long before her
accusation now spread like a mold across its branches. It tore everyone apart.
Then, in 1996, Meredith came to another startling realization: her father actually hadn’t sexually
abused her. (I know: oops.) She, with the help of a well-intentioned therapist, had actually invented
the memory. Consumed by guilt, she spent the rest of her father’s life attempting to reconcile with him
and other family members through constant apologizing and explaining. But it was too late. Her father
passed away and her family would never be the same.
It turned out Meredith wasn’t alone. As she describes in her autobiography, My Lie: A True Story
of False Memory, throughout the 1980s, many women accused male family members of sexual abuse
only to turn around and recant years later. Similarly, there was a whole swath of people who claimed
during that same decade that there were satanic cults abusing children, yet despite police
investigations in dozens of cities, police never found any evidence of the crazy practices described.
Why were people suddenly inventing memories of horrible abuse in families and cults? And why
was it all happening then, in the 1980s?
Ever play the telephone game as a kid? You know, you say something in one person’s ear and it
gets passed through like ten people, and what the last person hears is completely unrelated to what
you started with? That’s basically how our memories work.
We experience something. Then we remember it slightly differently a few days later, as if it had
been whispered and misheard. Then we tell somebody about it and have to fill in a couple of the plot
holes with our own embellishments to make sure everything makes sense and we’re not crazy. And
then we come to believe those little filled-in mental gaps, and so we tell those the next time too.
Except they’re not real, so we get them a little bit wrong. And we’re drunk one night a year later
when we tell the story, so we embellish it a little bit more—okay, let’s be honest, we completely
make up about one-third of it. But when we’re sober the next week, we don’t want to admit that we’re
a big fat liar, so we go along with the revised and newly expanded drunkard version of our story. And
five years later, our absolutely, swear-to-god, swear-on-my-mother’s-grave, truer-than-true story is at
most 50 percent true.
We all do this. You do. I do. No matter how honest and well-intentioned we are, we’re in a
perpetual state of misleading ourselves and others for no other reason than that our brain is designed
to be efficient, not accurate.
Not only does our memory suck—suck to the point that eyewitness testimony isn’t necessarily
taken seriously in court cases—but our brain functions in a horribly biased way.
How so? Well, our brain is always trying to make sense of our current situation based on what we
already believe and have already experienced. Every new piece of information is measured against
the values and conclusions we already have. As a result, our brain is always biased toward what we
feel to be true in that moment. So when we have a great relationship with our sister, we’ll interpret
most of our memories about her in a positive light. But when the relationship sours, we’ll often come
to see those exact same memories differently, reinventing them in such a way as to explain our
present-day anger toward her. That sweet gift she gave us last Christmas is now remembered as
patronizing and condescending. That time she forgot to invite us to her lake house is now seen not as
an innocent mistake but as horrible negligence.
Meredith’s fake abuse story makes far more sense when we understand the values in which her
beliefs arose. First of all, Meredith had had a strained and difficult relationship with her father
throughout most of her life. Second, Meredith had had a series of failed intimate relationships with
men, including a failed marriage.
So already, in terms of her values, “close relationships with men” weren’t doing so hot.
Then, in the early 1980s, Meredith became a radical feminist and began doing research into child
abuse. She was confronted with horrific story after horrific story of abuse, and she dealt with incest
survivors—usually little girls—for years on end. She also reported extensively on a number of
inaccurate studies that came out around that time—studies that it later turned out grossly
overestimated the prevalence of child molestation. (The most famous study reported that a third of
adult women had been sexually molested as children, a number that has since been shown to be false.)
And on top of all of this, Meredith fell in love and began a relationship with another woman, an
incest survivor. Meredith developed a codependent and toxic relationship with her partner, one in
which Meredith continually tried to “save” the other woman from her traumatic past. Her partner also
used her traumatic past as a weapon of guilt to earn Meredith’s affection (more on this and boundaries
in chapter 8). Meanwhile, Meredith’s relationship with her father deteriorated even further (he wasn’t
exactly thrilled that she was now in a lesbian relationship), and she was attending therapy at an
almost compulsive rate. Her therapists, who had their own values and beliefs driving their behavior,
regularly insisted that it couldn’t simply be Meredith’s highly stressful reporting job or her poor
relationships that were making her so unhappy; it must be something else, something deeper.
Around this time, a new form of treatment called repressed memory therapy was becoming hugely
popular. This therapy involved a therapist putting a client into a trancelike state where she was
encouraged to root out and reexperience forgotten childhood memories. These memories were often
benign, but the idea was that at least a few of them would be traumatic as well.
So there you have poor Meredith, miserable and researching incest and child molestation every
day, angry at her father, having endured an entire lifetime of failed relationships with men, and the
only person who seems to understand her or love her is another woman who is a survivor of incest.
Oh, and she’s lying on a couch crying every other day with a therapist demanding over and over that
she remember something she can’t remember. And voilà, you have a perfect recipe for an invented
memory of sexual abuse that never happened.
Our mind’s biggest priority when processing experiences is to interpret them in such a way that
they will cohere with all of our previous experiences, feelings, and beliefs. But often we run into life
situations where past and present don’t cohere: on such occasions, what we’re experiencing in the
moment flies in the face of everything we’ve accepted as true and reasonable about our past. In an
effort to achieve coherence, our mind will sometimes, in cases like that, invent false memories. By
linking our present experiences with that imagined past, our mind allows us to maintain whatever
meaning we already established.
As noted earlier, Meredith’s story is not unique. In fact, in the 1980s and early 1990s, hundreds of
innocent people were wrongly accused of sexual violence under similar circumstances. Many of them
went to prison for it.
For people who were dissatisfied with their lives, these suggestive explanations, combined with
the sensationalizing media—there were veritable epidemics of sexual abuse and satanic violence
going on, and you could be a victim too—gave people’s unconscious minds the incentive to fudge
their memories a bit and explain their current suffering in a way that allowed them to be victims and
avoid responsibility. Repressed memory therapy then acted as a means to pull these unconscious
desires out and put them into a seemingly tangible form of a memory.
This process, and the state of mind it resulted in, became so common that a name was introduced
for it: false memory syndrome. It changed the way courtrooms operate. Thousands of therapists were
sued and lost their licenses. Repressed memory therapy fell out of practice and was replaced by more
practical methods. Recent research has only reinforced the painful lesson of that era: our beliefs are
malleable, and our memories are horribly unreliable.
There’s a lot of conventional wisdom out there telling you to “trust yourself,” to “go with your
gut,” and all sorts of other pleasant-sounding clichés.
But perhaps the answer is to trust yourself less. After all, if our hearts and minds are so
unreliable, maybe we should be questioning our own intentions and motivations more. If we’re all
wrong, all the time, then isn’t self-skepticism and the rigorous challenging of our own beliefs and
assumptions the only logical route to progress?
This may sound scary and self-destructive. But it’s actually quite the opposite. It’s not only the
safer option, but it’s liberating as well.
The Dangers of Pure Certainty
Erin sits across from me at the sushi restaurant and tries to explain why she doesn’t believe in death.
It’s been almost three hours, and she’s eaten exactly four cucumber rolls and drunk an entire bottle of
sake by herself. (In fact, she’s about halfway through bottle number two now.) It’s four o’clock on a
Tuesday afternoon.
I didn’t invite her here. She found out where I was via the Internet and flew out to come find me.
Again.
She’s done this before. You see, Erin is convinced that she can cure death, but she’s also
convinced that she needs my help to do it. But not my help in like a business sense. If she just needed
some PR advice or something, that would be one thing. No, it’s more than that: she needs me to be her
boyfriend. Why? After three hours of questioning and a bottle and a half of sake, it still isn’t clear.
My fiancée was with us in the restaurant, by the way. Erin thought it important that she be included
in the discussion; Erin wanted her to know that she was “willing to share” me and that my girlfriend
(now wife) “shouldn’t feel threatened” by her.
I met Erin at a self-help seminar in 2008. She seemed like a nice enough person. A little bit on the
woo-woo, New Agey side of things, but she was a lawyer and had gone to an Ivy League school, and
was clearly smart. And she laughed at my jokes and thought I was cute—so, of course, knowing me, I
slept with her.
A month later, she invited me to uproot across the country and move in with her. This struck me as
somewhat of a red flag, and so I tried to break things off with her. She responded by saying that she
would kill herself if I refused to be with her. Okay, so make that two red flags. I promptly blocked her
from my email and all my devices.
This would slow her down but not stop her.
Years before I met her, Erin had gotten into a car accident and nearly died. Actually, she had
medically “died” for a few moments—all brain activity had stopped—but she had somehow
miraculously been revived. When she “came back,” she claimed everything had changed. She became
a very spiritual person. She became interested in, and started believing in, energy healing and angels
and universal consciousness and tarot cards. She also believed that she had become a healer and an
empath and that she could see the future. And for whatever reason, upon meeting me, she decided that
she and I were destined to save the world together. To “cure death,” as she put it.
After I’d blocked her, she began to create new email addresses, sometimes sending me as many as
a dozen angry emails in a single day. She created fake Facebook and Twitter accounts that she used to
harass me as well as people close to me. She created a website identical to mine and wrote dozens of
articles claiming that I was her ex-boyfriend and that I had lied to her and cheated her, that I had
promised to marry her and that she and I belonged together. When I contacted her to take the site
down, she said that she would take it down only if I flew to California to be with her. This was her
idea of a compromise.
And through all of this, her justification was the same: I was destined to be with her, that God had
preordained it, that she literally woke up in the middle of the night to the voices of angels
commanding that “our special relationship” was to be the harbinger of a new age of permanent peace
on earth. (Yes, she really told me this.)
By the time we were sitting in that sushi restaurant together, there had been thousands of emails.
Whether I responded or didn’t respond, replied respectfully or replied angrily, nothing ever changed.
Her mind never changed; her beliefs never budged. This had gone on for over seven years by then
(and counting).
And so it was, in that small sushi restaurant, with Erin guzzling sake and babbling for hours about
how she’d cured her cat’s kidney stones with energy tapping, that something occurred to me:
Erin is a self-improvement junkie. She spends tens of thousands of dollars on books and seminars
and courses. And the craziest part of all this is that Erin embodies all the lessons she’s learned to a T.
She has her dream. She stays persistent with it. She visualizes and takes action and weathers the
rejections and failures and gets up and tries again. She’s relentlessly positive. She thinks pretty damn
highly of herself. I mean, she claims to heal cats the same way Jesus healed Lazarus—come the fuck
on.
And yet her values are so fucked that none of this matters. The fact that she does everything
“right” doesn’t make her right.
There is a certainty in her that refuses to relinquish itself. She has even told me this in so many
words: that she knows her fixation is completely irrational and unhealthy and is making both her and
me unhappy. But for some reason it feels so right to her that she can’t ignore it and she can’t stop.
In the mid-1990s, psychologist Roy Baumeister began researching the concept of evil. Basically,
he looked at people who do bad things and at why they do them.
At the time it was assumed that people did bad things because they felt horrible about themselves
—that is, they had low self-esteem. One of Baumeister’s first surprising findings was that this was
often not true. In fact, it was usually the opposite. Some of the worst criminals felt pretty damn good
about themselves. And it was this feeling good about themselves in spite of the reality around them
that gave them the sense of justification for hurting and disrespecting others.
For individuals to feel justified in doing horrible things to other people, they must feel an
unwavering certainty in their own righteousness, in their own beliefs and deservedness. Racists do
racist things because they’re certain about their genetic superiority. Religious fanatics blow
themselves up and murder dozens of people because they’re certain of their place in heaven as
martyrs. Men rape and abuse women out of their certainty that they’re entitled to women’s bodies.
Evil people never believe that they are evil; rather, they believe that everyone else is evil.
In controversial experiments, now simply known as the Milgram Experiments, named for the
psychologist Stanley Milgram, researchers told “normal” people that they were to punish other
volunteers for breaking various rules. And punish them they did, sometimes escalating the punishment
to the point of physical abuse. Almost none of the punishers objected or asked for explanation. On the
contrary, many of them seemed to relish the certainty of the moral righteousness bestowed upon them
by the experiments.
The problem here is that not only is certainty unattainable, but the pursuit of certainty often breeds
more (and worse) insecurity.
Many people have an unshakable certainty in their ability at their job or in the amount of salary
they should be making. But that certainty makes them feel worse, not better. They see others getting
promoted over them, and they feel slighted. They feel unappreciated and underacknowledged.
Even a behavior as simple as sneaking a peek at your boyfriend’s text messages or asking a friend
what people are saying about you is driven by insecurity and that aching desire to be certain.
You can check your boyfriend’s text messages and find nothing, but that’s rarely the end of it; then
you may start wondering if he has a second phone. You can feel slighted and stepped over at work to
explain why you missed out on a promotion, but then that causes you to distrust your coworkers and
second-guess everything they say to you (and how you think they feel about you), which in turn makes
you even less likely to get promoted. You can keep pursuing that special someone you’re “supposed”
to be with, but with each rebuffed advance and each lonely night, you only begin to question more and
more what you’re doing wrong.
And it’s in these moments of insecurity, of deep despair, that we become susceptible to an
insidious entitlement: believing that we deserve to cheat a little to get our way, that other people
deserve to be punished, that we deserve to take what we want, and sometimes violently.
It’s the backwards law again: the more you try to be certain about something, the more uncertain
and insecure you will feel.
But the converse is true as well: the more you embrace being uncertain and not knowing, the more
comfortable you will feel in knowing what you don’t know.
Uncertainty removes our judgments of others; it preempts the unnecessary stereotyping and biases
that we otherwise feel when we see somebody on TV, in the office, or on the street. Uncertainty also
relieves us of our judgment of ourselves. We don’t know if we’re lovable or not; we don’t know how
attractive we are; we don’t know how successful we could potentially become. The only way to
achieve these things is to remain uncertain of them and be open to finding them out through
experience.
Uncertainty is the root of all progress and all growth. As the old adage goes, the man who
believes he knows everything learns nothing. We cannot learn anything without first not knowing
something. The more we admit we do not know, the more opportunities we gain to learn.
Our values are imperfect and incomplete, and to assume that they are perfect and complete is to
put us in a dangerously dogmatic mindset that breeds entitlement and avoids responsibility. The only
way to solve our problems is to first admit that our actions and beliefs up to this point have been
wrong and are not working.
This openness to being wrong must exist for any real change or growth to take place.
Before we can look at our values and prioritizations and change them into better, healthier ones,
we must first become uncertain of our current values. We must intellectually strip them away, see
their faults and biases, see how they don’t fit in with much of the rest of the world, to stare our own
ignorance in the face and concede, because our own ignorance is greater than us all.
Manson’s Law of Avoidance
Chances are you’ve heard some form of Parkinson’s law: “Work expands so as to fill up the time
available for its completion.”
You’ve also undoubtedly heard of Murphy’s law: “Whatever can go wrong will go wrong.”
Well, next time you’re at a swanky cocktail party and you want to impress somebody, try dropping
Manson’s law of avoidance on them:
The more something threatens your identity, the more you will avoid it.
That means the more something threatens to change how you view yourself, how
successful/unsuccessful you believe yourself to be, how well you see yourself living up to your
values, the more you will avoid ever getting around to doing it.
There’s a certain comfort that comes with knowing how you fit in the world. Anything that shakes
up that comfort—even if it could potentially make your life better—is inherently scary.
Manson’s law applies to both good and bad things in life. Making a million dollars could threaten
your identity just as much as losing all your money; becoming a famous rock star could threaten your
identity just as much as losing your job. This is why people are often so afraid of success—for the
exact same reason they’re afraid of failure: it threatens who they believe themselves to be.
You avoid writing that screenplay you’ve always dreamed of because doing so would call into
question your identity as a practical insurance adjuster. You avoid talking to your husband about being
more adventurous in the bedroom because that conversation would challenge your identity as a good,
moral woman. You avoid telling your friend that you don’t want to see him anymore because ending
the friendship would conflict with your identity as a nice, forgiving person.
These are good, important opportunities that we consistently pass up because they threaten to
change how we view and feel about ourselves. They threaten the values that we’ve chosen and have
learned to live up to.
I had a friend who, for the longest time, talked about putting his artwork online and trying to make
a go of it as a professional (or at least semiprofessional) artist. He talked about it for years; he saved
up money; he even built a few different websites and uploaded his portfolio.
But he never launched. There was always some reason: the resolution on his work wasn’t good
enough, or he had just painted something better, or he wasn’t in a position to dedicate enough time to
it yet.
Years passed and he never did give up his “real job.” Why? Because despite dreaming about
making a living through his art, the real potential of becoming An Artist Nobody Likes was far, far
scarier than remaining An Artist Nobody’s Heard Of. At least he was comfortable with and used to
being An Artist Nobody’s Heard Of.
I had another friend who was a party guy, always going out drinking and chasing girls. After years
of living the “high life,” he found himself terribly lonely, depressed, and unhealthy. He wanted to give
up his party lifestyle. He spoke with a fierce jealousy of those of us who were in relationships and
more “settled down” than he was. Yet he never changed. For years he went on, empty night after
empty night, bottle after bottle. Always some excuse. Always some reason he couldn’t slow down.
Giving up that lifestyle threatened his identity too much. The Party Guy was all he knew how to
be. To give that up would be like committing psychological hara-kiri.
We all have values for ourselves. We protect these values. We try to live up to them and we justify
them and maintain them. Even if we don’t mean to, that’s how our brain is wired. As noted before,
we’re unfairly biased toward what we already know, what we believe to be certain. If I believe I’m a
nice guy, I’ll avoid situations that could potentially contradict that belief. If I believe I’m an awesome
cook, I’ll seek out opportunities to prove that to myself over and over again. The belief always takes
precedence. Until we change how we view ourselves, what we believe we are and are not, we cannot
overcome our avoidance and anxiety. We cannot change.
In this way, “knowing yourself” or “finding yourself” can be dangerous. It can cement you into a
strict role and saddle you with unnecessary expectations. It can close you off to inner potential and
outer opportunities.
I say don’t find yourself. I say never know who you are. Because that’s what keeps you striving
and discovering. And it forces you to remain humble in your judgments and accepting of the
differences in others.
Kill Yourself
Buddhism argues that your idea of who “you” are is an arbitrary mental construction and that you
should let go of the idea that “you” exist at all; that the arbitrary metrics by which you define yourself
actually trap you, and thus you’re better off letting go of everything. In a sense, you could say that
Buddhism encourages you to not give a fuck.
It sounds wonky, but there are some psychological benefits to this approach to life. When we let
go of the stories we tell about ourselves, to ourselves, we free ourselves up to actually act (and fail)
and grow.
When someone admits to herself, “You know, maybe I’m not good at relationships,” then she is
suddenly free to act and end her bad marriage. She has no identity to protect by staying in a miserable,
crappy marriage just to prove something to herself.
When the student admits to himself, “You know, maybe I’m not a rebel; maybe I’m just scared,”
then he’s free to be ambitious again. He has no reason to feel threatened by pursuing his academic
dreams and maybe failing.
When the insurance adjuster admits to himself, “You know, maybe there’s nothing unique or
special about my dreams or my job,” then he’s free to give that screenplay an honest go and see what
happens.
I have both some good news and some bad news for you: there is little that is unique or special
about your problems. That’s why letting go is so liberating.
There’s a kind of self-absorption that comes with fear based on an irrational certainty. When you
assume that your plane is the one that’s going to crash, or that your project idea is the stupid one
everyone is going to laugh at, or that you’re the one everyone is going to choose to mock or ignore,
you’re implicitly telling yourself, “I’m the exception; I’m unlike everybody else; I’m different and
special.”
This is narcissism, pure and simple. You feel as though your problems deserve to be treated
differently, that your problems have some unique math to them that doesn’t obey the laws of the
physical universe.
My recommendation: don’t be special; don’t be unique. Redefine your metrics in mundane and
broad ways. Choose to measure yourself not as a rising star or an undiscovered genius. Choose to
measure yourself not as some horrible victim or dismal failure. Instead, measure yourself by more
mundane identities: a student, a partner, a friend, a creator.
The narrower and rarer the identity you choose for yourself, the more everything will seem to
threaten you. For that reason, define yourself in the simplest and most ordinary ways possible.
This often means giving up some grandiose ideas about yourself: that you’re uniquely intelligent,
or spectacularly talented, or intimidatingly attractive, or especially victimized in ways other people
could never imagine. This means giving up your sense of entitlement and your belief that you’re
somehow owed something by this world. This means giving up the supply of emotional highs that
you’ve been sustaining yourself on for years. Like a junkie giving up the needle, you’re going to go
through withdrawal when you start giving these things up. But you’ll come out the other side so much
better.
How to Be a Little Less Certain of Yourself
Questioning ourselves and doubting our own thoughts and beliefs is one of the hardest skills to
develop. But it can be done. Here are some questions that will help you breed a little more
uncertainty in your life.
Question #1: What if I’m wrong?
A friend of mine recently got engaged to be married. The guy who proposed to her is pretty solid.
He doesn’t drink. He doesn’t hit her or mistreat her. He’s friendly and has a good job.
But since the engagement, my friend’s brother has been admonishing her nonstop about her
immature life choices, warning her that she’s going to hurt herself with this guy, that she’s making a
mistake, that she’s being irresponsible. And whenever my friend asks her brother, “What is your
problem? Why does this bother you so much?” he acts as though there is no problem, that nothing
about the engagement bothers him, that he’s just trying to be helpful and look out for his little sister.
But it’s clear that something does bother him. Perhaps it’s his own insecurities about getting
married. Perhaps it’s a sibling rivalry thing. Perhaps it’s jealousy. Perhaps he’s just so caught up in
his own victimhood that he doesn’t know how to show happiness for others without trying to make
them feel miserable first.
As a general rule, we’re all the world’s worst observers of ourselves. When we’re angry, or
jealous, or upset, we’re oftentimes the last ones to figure it out. And the only way to figure it out is to
put cracks in our armor of certainty by consistently questioning how wrong we might be about
ourselves.
“Am I jealous—and if I am, then why?” “Am I angry?” “Is she right, and I’m just protecting my
ego?”
Questions like these need to become a mental habit. In many cases, the simple act of asking
ourselves such questions generates the humility and compassion needed to resolve a lot of our issues.
But it’s important to note that just because you ask yourself if you have the wrong idea doesn’t
necessarily mean that you do. If your husband beats the crap out of you for burning the pot roast and
you ask yourself if you’re wrong to believe he’s mistreating you—well, sometimes you’re right. The
goal is merely to ask the question and entertain the thought at the moment, not to hate yourself.
It’s worth remembering that for any change to happen in your life, you must be wrong about
something. If you’re sitting there, miserable day after day, then that means you’re already wrong
about something major in your life, and until you’re able to question yourself to find it, nothing will
change.
Question #2: What would it mean if I were wrong?
Many people are able to ask themselves if they’re wrong, but few are able to go the extra step and
admit what it would mean if they were wrong. That’s because the potential meaning behind our
wrongness is often painful. Not only does it call into question our values, but it forces us to consider
what a different, contradictory value could potentially look and feel like.
Aristotle wrote, “It is the mark of an educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without
accepting it.” Being able to look at and evaluate different values without necessarily adopting them is
perhaps the central skill required in changing one’s own life in a meaningful way.
As for my friend’s brother, his question to himself should be, “What would it mean if I were
wrong about my sister’s wedding?” Often the answer to such a question is pretty straightforward (and
some form of “I’m being a selfish/insecure/narcissistic asshole”). If he is wrong, and his sister’s
engagement is fine and healthy and happy, there’s really no way to explain his own behavior other
than through his own insecurities and fucked-up values. He assumes that he knows what’s best for his
sister and that she can’t make major life decisions for herself; he assumes that he has the right and
responsibility to make decisions for her; he is certain that he’s right and everyone else must be wrong.
Even once uncovered, whether in my friend’s brother or in ourselves, that sort of entitlement is
hard to admit. It hurts. That’s why few people ask the difficult questions. But probing questions are
necessary in order to get at the core problems that are motivating his, and our, dickish behavior.
Question #3: Would being wrong create a better or a worse problem than my current
problem, for both myself and others?
This is the litmus test for determining whether we’ve got some pretty solid values going on, or
we’re totally neurotic fuckwads taking our fucks out on everyone, including ourselves.
The goal here is to look at which problem is better. Because after all, as Disappointment Panda
said, life’s problems are endless.
My friend’s brother, what are his options?
A. Continue causing drama and friction within the family, complicating what should otherwise be
a happy moment, and damage the trust and respect he has with his sister, all because he has a
hunch (some might call it an intuition) that this guy is bad for her.
B. Mistrust his own ability to determine what’s right or wrong for his sister’s life and remain
humble, trust her ability to make her own decisions, and even if he doesn’t, live with the results
out of his love and respect for her.
Most people choose option A. That’s because option A is the easier path. It requires little thought,
no second-guessing, and zero tolerance of decisions other people make that you don’t like.
It also creates the most misery for everyone involved.
It’s option B that sustains healthy and happy relationships built on trust and respect. It’s option B
that forces people to remain humble and admit ignorance. It’s option B that allows people to grow
beyond their insecurities and recognize situations where they’re being impulsive or unfair or selfish.
But option B is hard and painful, so most people don’t choose it.
My friend’s brother, in protesting her engagement, entered into an imaginary battle with himself.
Sure, he believed he was trying to protect his sister, but as we’ve seen, beliefs are arbitrary; worse
yet, they’re often made up after the fact to justify whatever values and metrics we’ve chosen for
ourselves. The truth is, he would rather fuck up his relationship with his sister than consider that he
might be wrong—even though the latter could help him to grow out of the insecurities that made him
wrong in the first place.
I try to live with few rules, but one that I’ve adopted over the years is this: if it’s down to me
being screwed up, or everybody else being screwed up, it is far, far, far more likely that I’m the one
who’s screwed up. I have learned this from experience. I have been the asshole acting out based on
my own insecurities and flawed certainties more times than I can count. It’s not pretty.
That’s not to say there aren’t certain ways in which most people are screwed up. And that’s not to
say that there aren’t times when you’ll be more right than most other people.
That’s simply reality: if it feels like it’s you versus the world, chances are it’s really just you
versus yourself.
CHAPTER 7
Failure Is the Way Forward
I really mean it when I say it: I was fortunate.
I graduated college in 2007, just in time for the financial collapse and Great Recession, and
attempted to enter the worst job market in more than eighty years.
Around the same time, I found out that the person who was subletting one of the rooms in my
apartment hadn’t paid any rent for three months. When confronted about this, she cried and then
disappeared, leaving my other roommate and me to cover everything. Goodbye, savings. I spent the
next six months living on a friend’s couch, stringing together odd jobs and trying to stay in as little
debt as possible while looking for a “real job.”
I say I was fortunate because I entered the adult world already a failure. I started out at rock
bottom. That’s basically everybody’s biggest fear later on in life, when confronted with starting a new
business or changing careers or quitting an awful job, and I got to experience it right out of the gates.
Things could only get better.
So yeah, lucky. When you’re sleeping on a smelly futon and have to count coins to figure out
whether you can afford McDonald’s this week and you’ve sent out twenty résumés without hearing a
single word back, then starting a blog and a stupid Internet business doesn’t sound like such a scary
idea. If every project I started failed, if every post I wrote went unread, I’d only be back exactly
where I started. So why not try?
Failure itself is a relative concept. If my metric had been to become an anarcho-communist
revolutionary, then my complete failure to make any money between 2007 and 2008 would have been
a raving success. But if, like most people, my metric had been to simply find a first serious job that
could pay some bills right out of school, I was a dismal failure.
I grew up in a wealthy family. Money was never a problem. On the contrary, I grew up in a
wealthy family where money was more often used to avoid problems than solve them. I was again
fortunate, because this taught me at an early age that making money, by itself, was a lousy metric for
myself. You could make plenty of money and be miserable, just as you could be broke and be pretty
happy. Therefore, why use money as a means to measure my self-worth?
Instead, my value was something else. It was freedom, autonomy. The idea of being an
entrepreneur had always appealed to me because I hated being told what to do and preferred to do
things my way. The idea of working on the Internet appealed to me because I could do it from
anywhere and work whenever I wanted.
I asked myself a simple question: “Would I rather make decent money and work a job I hated, or
play at Internet entrepreneur and be broke for a while?” The answer was immediate and clear for me:
the latter. I then asked myself, “If I try this thing and fail in a few years and have to go get a job
anyway, will I have really lost anything?” The answer was no. Instead of a broke and unemployed
twenty-two-year-old with no experience, I’d be a broke and unemployed twenty-five-year-old with
no experience. Who cares?
With this value, to not pursue my own projects became the failure—not a lack of money, not
sleeping on friends’ and family’s couches (which I continued to do for most of the next two years),
and not an empty résumé.
The Failure/Success Paradox
When Pablo Picasso was an old man, he was sitting in a café in Spain, doodling on a used napkin. He
was nonchalant about the whole thing, drawing whatever amused him in that moment—kind of the
same way teenage boys draw penises on bathroom stalls—except this was Picasso, so his bathroomstall
penises were more like cubist/impressionist awesomeness laced on top of faint coffee stains.
Anyway, some woman sitting near him was looking on in awe. After a few moments, Picasso
finished his coffee and crumpled up the napkin to throw away as he left.
The woman stopped him. “Wait,” she said. “Can I have that napkin you were just drawing on? I’ll
pay you for it.”
“Sure,” Picasso replied. “Twenty thousand dollars.”
The woman’s head jolted back as if he had just flung a brick at her. “What? It took you like two
minutes to draw that.”
“No, ma’am,” Picasso said. “It took me over sixty years to draw this.” He stuffed the napkin in his
pocket and walked out of the café.
Improvement at anything is based on thousands of tiny failures, and the magnitude of your success
is based on how many times you’ve failed at something. If someone is better than you at something,
then it’s likely because she has failed at it more than you have. If someone is worse than you, it’s
likely because he hasn’t been through all of the painful learning experiences you have.
If you think about a young child trying to learn to walk, that child will fall down and hurt itself
hundreds of times. But at no point does that child ever stop and think, “Oh, I guess walking just isn’t
for me. I’m not good at it.”
Avoiding failure is something we learn at some later point in life. I’m sure a lot of it comes from
our education system, which judges rigorously based on performance and punishes those who don’t
do well. Another large share of it comes from overbearing or critical parents who don’t let their kids
screw up on their own often enough, and instead punish them for trying anything new or not
preordained. And then we have all the mass media that constantly expose us to stellar success after
success, while not showing us the thousands of hours of dull practice and tedium that were required to
achieve that success.
At some point, most of us reach a place where we’re afraid to fail, where we instinctively avoid
failure and stick only to what is placed in front of us or only what we’re already good at.
This confines us and stifles us. We can be truly successful only at something we’re willing to fail
at. If we’re unwilling to fail, then we’re unwilling to succeed.
A lot of this fear of failure comes from having chosen shitty values. For instance, if I measure
myself by the standard “Make everyone I meet like me,” I will be anxious, because failure is 100
percent defined by the actions of others, not by my own actions. I am not in control; thus my self-
worth is at the mercy of judgments by others.
Whereas if I instead adopt the metric “Improve my social life,” I can live up to my value of “good
relations with others” regardless of how other people respond to me. My self-worth is based on my
own behaviors and happiness.
Shitty values, as we saw in chapter 4, involve tangible external goals outside of our control. The
pursuit of these goals causes great anxiety. And even if we manage to achieve them, they leave us
feeling empty and lifeless, because once they’re achieved there are no more problems to solve.
Better values, as we saw, are process-oriented. Something like “Express myself honestly to
others,” a metric for the value “honesty,” is never completely finished; it’s a problem that must
continuously be reengaged. Every new conversation, every new relationship, brings new challenges
and opportunities for honest expression. The value is an ongoing, lifelong process that defies
completion.
If your metric for the value “success by worldly standards” is “Buy a house and a nice car,” and
you spend twenty years working your ass off to achieve it, once it’s achieved the metric has nothing
left to give you. Then say hello to your midlife crisis, because the problem that drove you your entire
adult life was just taken away from you. There are no other opportunities to keep growing and
improving, and yet it’s growth that generates happiness, not a long list of arbitrary achievements.
In this sense, goals, as they are conventionally defined—graduate from college, buy a lake house,
lose fifteen pounds—are limited in the amount of happiness they can produce in our lives. They may
be helpful when pursuing quick, short-term benefits, but as guides for the overall trajectory of our
life, they suck.
Picasso remained prolific his entire life. He lived into his nineties and continued to produce art
up until his final years. Had his metric been “Become famous” or “Make a buttload of money in the
art world” or “Paint one thousand pictures,” he would have stagnated at some point along the way. He
would have been overcome by anxiety or self-doubt. He likely wouldn’t have improved and
innovated his craft in the ways he did decade after decade.
The reason for Picasso’s success is exactly the same reason why, as an old man, he was happy to
scribble drawings on a napkin alone in a café. His underlying value was simple and humble. And it
was endless. It was the value “honest expression.” And this is what made that napkin so valuable.
Pain Is Part of the Process
In the 1950s, a Polish psychologist named Kazimierz Dabrowski studied World War II survivors and
how they’d coped with traumatic experiences in the war. This was Poland, so things had been pretty
gruesome. These people had experienced or witnessed mass starvation, bombings that turned cities to
rubble, the Holocaust, the torture of prisoners of war, and the rape and/or murder of family members,
if not by the Nazis, then a few years later by the Soviets.
As Dabrowski studied the survivors, he noticed something both surprising and amazing. A sizable
percentage of them believed that the wartime experiences they’d suffered, although painful and indeed
traumatic, had actually caused them to become better, more responsible, and yes, even happier
people. Many described their lives before the war as if they’d been different people then: ungrateful
for and unappreciative of their loved ones, lazy and consumed by petty problems, entitled to all
they’d been given. After the war they felt more confident, more sure of themselves, more grateful, and
unfazed by life’s trivialities and petty annoyances.
Obviously, their experiences had been horrific, and these survivors weren’t happy about having
had to experience them. Many of them still suffered from the emotional scars the lashings of war had
left on them. But some of them had managed to leverage those scars to transform themselves in
positive and powerful ways.
And they aren’t alone in that reversal. For many of us, our proudest achievements come in the face
of the greatest adversity. Our pain often makes us stronger, more resilient, more grounded. Many
cancer survivors, for example, report feeling stronger and more grateful after winning their battle to
survive. Many military personnel report a mental resilience gained from withstanding the dangerous
environments of being in a war zone.
Dabrowski argued that fear and anxiety and sadness are not necessarily always undesirable or
unhelpful states of mind; rather, they are often representative of the necessary pain of psychological
growth. And to deny that pain is to deny our own potential. Just as one must suffer physical pain to
build stronger bone and muscle, one must suffer emotional pain to develop greater emotional
resilience, a stronger sense of self, increased compassion, and a generally happier life.
Our most radical changes in perspective often happen at the tail end of our worst moments. It’s
only when we feel intense pain that we’re willing to look at our values and question why they seem to
be failing us. We need some sort of existential crisis to take an objective look at how we’ve been
deriving meaning in our life, and then consider changing course.
You could call it “hitting bottom” or “having an existential crisis.” I prefer to call it “weathering
the shitstorm.” Choose what suits you.
And perhaps you’re in that kind of place right now. Perhaps you’re coming out of the most
significant challenge of your life and are bewildered because everything you previously thought to be
true and normal and good has turned out to be the opposite.
That’s good—that’s the beginning. I can’t stress this enough, but pain is part of the process. It’s
important to feel it. Because if you just chase after highs to cover up the pain, if you continue to
indulge in entitlement and delusional positive thinking, if you continue to overindulge in various
substances or activities, then you’ll never generate the requisite motivation to actually change.
When I was young, any time my family got a new VCR or stereo, I would press every button, plug
and unplug every cord and cable, just to see what everything did. With time, I learned how the whole
system worked. And because I knew how it all worked, I was often the only person in the house who
used the stuff.
As is the case for many millennial children, my parents looked on as if I were some sort of
prodigy. To them, the fact that I could program the VCR without looking at the instruction manual
made me the Second Coming of Tesla.
It’s easy to look back at my parents’ generation and chuckle at their technophobia. But the further I
get into adulthood, the more I realize that we all have areas of our lives where we’re like my parents
with the new VCR: we sit and stare and shake our heads and say, “But how?” When really, it’s as
simple as just doing it.
I get emails from people asking questions like this all the time. And for many years, I never knew
what to say to them.
There’s the girl whose parents are immigrants and saved for their whole lives to put her through
med school. But now she’s in med school and she hates it; she doesn’t want to spend her life as a
doctor, so she wants to drop out more than anything. Yet she feels stuck. So stuck, in fact, that she ends
up emailing a stranger on the Internet (me) and asking him a silly and obvious question like, “How do
I drop out of med school?”
Or the college guy who has a crush on his tutor. So he agonizes over every sign, every laugh,
every smile, every diversion into small talk, and emails me a twenty-eight-page novella that
concludes with the question, “How do I ask her out?” Or the single mother whose now-adult kids
have finished school and are loafing around on her couch, eating her food, spending her money, not
respecting her space or her desire for privacy. She wants them to move on with their lives. She wants
to move on with her life. Yet she’s scared to death of pushing her children away, scared to the point
of asking, “How do I ask them to move out?”
These are VCR questions. From the outside, the answer is simple: just shut up and do it.
But from the inside, from the perspective of each of these people, these questions feel impossibly
complex and opaque—existential riddles wrapped in enigmas packed in a KFC bucket full of Rubik’s
Cubes.
VCR questions are funny because the answer appears difficult to anyone who has them and
appears easy to anyone who does not.
The problem here is pain. Filling out the appropriate paperwork to drop out of med school is a
straightforward and obvious action; breaking your parents’ hearts is not. Asking a tutor out on a date
is as simple as saying the words; risking intense embarrassment and rejection feels far more
complicated. Asking someone to move out of your house is a clear decision; feeling as if you’re
abandoning your own children is not.
I struggled with social anxiety throughout much of my adolescence and young adult life. I spent
most of my days distracting myself with video games and most of my nights either drinking or smoking
away my uneasiness. For many years, the thought of speaking to a stranger—especially if that stranger
happened to be particularly attractive/interesting/popular/smart—felt impossible to me. I walked
around in a daze for years, asking myself dumb VCR questions:
“How? How do you just walk up and talk to a person? How can somebody do that?”
I had all sorts of screwed-up beliefs about this, like that you weren’t allowed to speak to someone
unless you had some practical reason to, or that women would think I was a creepy rapist if I so much
as said, “Hello.”
The problem was that my emotions defined my reality. Because it felt like people didn’t want to
talk to me, I came to believe that people didn’t want to talk to me. And thus, my VCR question: “How
do you just walk up and talk to a person?”
Because I failed to separate what I felt from what was, I was incapable of stepping outside myself
and seeing the world for what it was: a simple place where two people can walk up to each other at
any time and speak.
Many people, when they feel some form of pain or anger or sadness, drop everything and attend to
numbing out whatever they’re feeling. Their goal is to get back to “feeling good” again as quickly as
possible, even if that means substances or deluding themselves or returning to their shitty values.
Learn to sustain the pain you’ve chosen. When you choose a new value, you are choosing to
introduce a new form of pain into your life. Relish it. Savor it. Welcome it with open arms. Then act
despite it.
I won’t lie: this is going to feel impossibly hard at first. But you can start simple. You’re going to
feel as though you don’t know what to do. But we’ve discussed this: you don’t know anything. Even
when you think you do, you really don’t know what the fuck you’re doing. So really, what is there to
lose?
Life is about not knowing and then doing something anyway. All of life is like this. It never
changes. Even when you’re happy. Even when you’re farting fairy dust. Even when you win the lottery
and buy a small fleet of Jet Skis, you still won’t know what the hell you’re doing. Don’t ever forget
that. And don’t ever be afraid of that.
The “Do Something” Principle
In 2008, after holding down a day job for all of six weeks, I gave up on the whole job thing to pursue
an online business. At the time, I had absolutely no clue what I was doing, but I figured if I was going
to be broke and miserable, I might as well be while working on my own terms. And at that time, all I
seemed to really care about was chasing girls. So fuck it, I decided to start a blog about my crazy
dating life.
That first morning that I woke up self-employed, terror quickly consumed me. I found myself
sitting with my laptop and realized, for the first time, that I was entirely responsible for all of my own
decisions, as well as the consequences of those decisions. I was responsible for teaching myself web
design, Internet marketing, search engine optimization, and other esoteric topics. It was all on my
shoulders now. And so I did what any twenty-four-year-old who’d just quit his job and had no idea
what he was doing would do: I downloaded some computer games and avoided work like it was the
Ebola virus.
As the weeks went on and my bank account turned from black to red, it was clear that I needed to
come up with some sort of strategy to get myself to put in the twelve- or fourteen-hour days that were
necessary to get a new business off the ground. And that plan came from an unexpected place.
When I was in high school, my math teacher Mr. Packwood used to say, “If you’re stuck on a
problem, don’t sit there and think about it; just start working on it. Even if you don’t know what
you’re doing, the simple act of working on it will eventually cause the right ideas to show up in your
head.”
During that early self-employment period, when I struggled every day, completely clueless about
what to do and terrified of the results (or lack thereof), Mr. Packwood’s advice started beckoning me
from the recesses of my mind. I heard it like a mantra:
Don’t just sit there. Do something. The answers will follow.
In the course of applying Mr. Packwood’s advice, I learned a powerful lesson about motivation. It
took about eight years for this lesson to sink in, but what I discovered, over those long, grueling
months of bombed product launches, laughable advice columns, uncomfortable nights on friends’
couches, overdrawn bank accounts, and hundreds of thousands of words written (most of them
unread), was perhaps the most important thing I’ve ever learned in my life:
Action isn’t just the effect of motivation; it’s also the cause of it.
Most of us commit to action only if we feel a certain level of motivation. And we feel motivation
only when we feel enough emotional inspiration. We assume that these steps occur in a sort of chain
reaction, like this:
Emotional inspiration → Motivation → Desirable action
If you want to accomplish something but don’t feel motivated or inspired, then you assume you’re
just screwed. There’s nothing you can do about it. It’s not until a major emotional life event occurs
that you can generate enough motivation to actually get off the couch and do something.
The thing about motivation is that it’s not only a three-part chain, but an endless loop:
Inspiration → Motivation → Action → Inspiration → Motivation → Action → Etc.
Your actions create further emotional reactions and inspirations and move on to motivate your
future actions. Taking advantage of this knowledge, we can actually reorient our mindset in the
following way:
Action → Inspiration → Motivation
If you lack the motivation to make an important change in your life, do something—anything,
really—and then harness the reaction to that action as a way to begin motivating yourself.
I call this the “do something” principle. After using it myself to build my business, I began
teaching it to readers who came to me perplexed by their own VCR questions: “How do I apply for a
job?” or “How do I tell this guy I want to be his girlfriend?” and the like.
During the first couple years I worked for myself, entire weeks would go by without my
accomplishing much, for no other reason than that I was anxious and stressed about what I had to do,
and it was too easy to put everything off. I quickly learned, though, that forcing myself to do
something, even the most menial of tasks, quickly made the larger tasks seem much easier. If I had to
redesign an entire website, I’d force myself to sit down and would say, “Okay, I’ll just design the
header right now.” But after the header was done, I’d find myself moving on to other parts of the site.
And before I knew it, I’d be energized and engaged in the project.
The author Tim Ferriss relates a story he once heard about a novelist who had written over
seventy novels. Someone asked the novelist how he was able to write so consistently and remain
inspired and motivated. He replied, “Two hundred crappy words per day, that’s it.” The idea was that
if he forced himself to write two hundred crappy words, more often than not the act of writing would
inspire him; and before he knew it, he’d have thousands of words down on the page.
If we follow the “do something” principle, failure feels unimportant. When the standard of
success becomes merely acting—when any result is regarded as progress and important, when
inspiration is seen as a reward rather than a prerequisite—we propel ourselves ahead. We feel free to
fail, and that failure moves us forward.
The “do something” principle not only helps us overcome procrastination, but it’s also the
process by which we adopt new values. If you’re in the midst of an existential shitstorm and
everything feels meaningless—if all the ways you used to measure yourself have come up short and
you have no idea what’s next, if you know that you’ve been hurting yourself chasing false dreams, or
if you know that there’s some better metric you should be measuring yourself with but you don’t know
how—the answer is the same:
Do something.
That “something” can be the smallest viable action toward something else. It can be anything.
Recognize that you’ve been an entitled prick in all of your relationships and want to start
developing more compassion for others? Do something. Start simple. Make it a goal to listen to
someone’s problem and give some of your time to helping that person. Just do it once. Or promise
yourself that you will assume that you are the root of your problems next time you get upset. Just try
on the idea and see how it feels.
That’s often all that’s necessary to get the snowball rolling, the action needed to inspire the
motivation to keep going. You can become your own source of inspiration. You can become your own
source of motivation. Action is always within reach. And with simply doing something as your only
metric for success—well, then even failure pushes you forward.
CHAPTER 8
The Importance of Saying No
In 2009, I gathered up all my possessions, sold them or put them into storage, left my apartment, and
set off for Latin America. By this time my little dating advice blog was getting some traffic and I was
actually making a modest amount of money selling PDFs and courses online. I planned on spending
much of the next few years living abroad, experiencing new cultures, and taking advantage of the
lower cost of living in a number of developing countries in Asia and Latin America to build my
business further. It was the digital nomad dream and as a twenty-five-year-old adventure-seeker, it
was exactly what I wanted out of life.
But as sexy and heroic as my plan sounded, not all of the values driving me to this nomadic
lifestyle were healthy ones. Sure, I had some admirable values going on—a thirst to see the world, a
curiosity for people and culture, some old-fashioned adventure-seeking. But there also existed a faint
outline of shame underlying everything else. At the time I was hardly aware of it, but if I was
completely honest with myself, I knew there was a screwed-up value lurking there, somewhere
beneath the surface. I couldn’t see it, but in quiet moments when I was completely honest with myself,
I could feel it.
Along with the entitlement of my early twenties, the “real traumatic shit” of my teenage years had
left me with a nice bundle of commitment issues. I had spent the past few years overcompensating for
the inadequacy and social anxiety of my teenager years, and as a result I felt like I could meet
anybody I wanted, be friends with anybody I wanted, love anybody I wanted, have sex with anybody I
wanted—so why would I ever commit to a single person, or even a single social group, a single city
or country or culture? If I could experience everything equally, then I should experience them all
equally, right?
Armed with this grandiose sense of connectivity to the world, I bounced back and forth across
countries and oceans in a game of global hopscotch that lasted over five years. I visited fifty-five
countries, made dozens of friends, and found myself in the arms of a number of lovers—all of whom
were quickly replaced and some of whom were already forgotten by the next flight to the next country.
It was a strange life, replete with fantastic, horizon-breaching experiences as well as superficial
highs designed to numb my underlying pain. It seemed both so profound yet so meaningless at the
same time, and still does. Some of my greatest life lessons and character-defining moments came on
the road during this period. But some of the biggest wastes of my time and energy came during this
period as well.
Now I live in New York. I have a house and furniture and an electric bill and a wife. None of it is
particularly glamorous or exciting. And I like it that way. Because after all the years of excitement,
the biggest lesson I took from my adventuring was this: absolute freedom, by itself, means nothing.
Freedom grants the opportunity for greater meaning, but by itself there is nothing necessarily
meaningful about it. Ultimately, the only way to achieve meaning and a sense of importance in one’s
life is through a rejection of alternatives, a narrowing of freedom, a choice of commitment to one
place, one belief, or (gulp) one person.
This realization came to me slowly over the course of my years traveling. As with most excesses
in life, you have to drown yourself in them to realize that they don’t make you happy. Such was
traveling with me. As I drowned in my fifty-third, fifty-fourth, fifty-fifth country, I began to understand
that while all of my experiences were exciting and great, few of them would have any lasting
significance. Whereas my friends back home were settling down into marriages, buying houses, and
giving their time to interesting companies or political causes, I was floundering from one high to the
next.
In 2011, I traveled to Saint Petersburg, Russia. The food sucked. The weather sucked. (Snow in
May? Are you fucking kidding me?) My apartment sucked. Nothing worked. Everything was
overpriced. The people were rude and smelled funny. Nobody smiled and everyone drank too much.
Yet, I loved it. It was one of my favorite trips.
There’s a bluntness to Russian culture that generally rubs Westerners the wrong way. Gone are the
fake niceties and verbal webs of politeness. You don’t smile at strangers or pretend to like anything
you don’t. In Russia, if something is stupid, you say it’s stupid. If someone is being an asshole, you
tell him he’s being an asshole. If you really like someone and are having a great time, you tell her that
you like her and are having a great time. It doesn’t matter if this person is your friend, a stranger, or
someone you met five minutes ago on the street.
The first week I found all of this really uncomfortable. I went on a coffee date with a Russian girl,
and within three minutes of sitting down she looked at me funny and told me that what I’d just said
was stupid. I nearly choked on my drink. There was nothing combative about the way she said it; it
was spoken as if it were some mundane fact—like the quality of the weather that day, or her shoe size
—but I was still shocked. After all, in the West such outspokenness is seen as highly offensive,
especially from someone you just met. But it went on like this with everyone. Everyone came across
as rude all the time, and as a result, my Western-coddled mind felt attacked on all sides. Nagging
insecurities began to surface in situations where they hadn’t existed in years.
But as the weeks wore on, I got used to the Russian frankness, much as I did the midnight sunsets
and the vodka that went down like ice water. And then I started appreciating it for what it really was:
unadulterated expression. Honesty in the truest sense of the word. Communication with no conditions,
no strings attached, no ulterior motive, no sales job, no desperate attempt to be liked.
Somehow, after years of travel, it was in perhaps the most un-American of places where I first
experienced a particular flavor of freedom: the ability to say whatever I thought or felt, without fear
of repercussion. It was a strange form of liberation through accepting rejection. And as someone who
had been starved of this kind of blunt expression most of his life—first by an emotionally repressed
family life, then later by a meticulously constructed false display of confidence—I got drunk on it
like, well, like it was the finest damn vodka I’d ever had. The month I spent in Saint Petersburg went
by in a blur, and by the end I didn’t want to leave.
Travel is a fantastic self-development tool, because it extricates you from the values of your
culture and shows you that another society can live with entirely different values and still function and
not hate themselves. This exposure to different cultural values and metrics then forces you to
reexamine what seems obvious in your own life and to consider that perhaps it’s not necessarily the
best way to live. In this case, Russia had me reexamining the bullshitty, fake-nice communication that
is so common in Anglo culture, and asking myself if this wasn’t somehow making us more insecure
around each other and worse at intimacy.
I remember discussing this dynamic with my Russian teacher one day, and he had an interesting
theory. Having lived under communism for so many generations, with little to no economic
opportunity and caged by a culture of fear, Russian society found the most valuable currency to be
trust. And to build trust you have to be honest. That means when things suck, you say so openly and
without apology. People’s displays of unpleasant honesty were rewarded for the simple fact that they
were necessary for survival—you had to know whom you could rely on and whom you couldn’t, and
you needed to know quickly.
But, in the “free” West, my Russian teacher continued, there existed an abundance of economic
opportunity—so much economic opportunity that it became far more valuable to present yourself in a
certain way, even if it was false, than to actually be that way. Trust lost its value. Appearances and
salesmanship became more advantageous forms of expression. Knowing a lot of people superficially
was more beneficial than knowing a few people closely.
This is why it became the norm in Western cultures to smile and say polite things even when you
don’t feel like it, to tell little white lies and agree with someone whom you don’t actually agree with.
This is why people learn to pretend to be friends with people they don’t actually like, to buy things
they don’t actually want. The economic system promotes such deception.
The downside of this is that you never know, in the West, if you can completely trust the person
you’re talking to. Sometimes this is the case even among good friends or family members. There is
such pressure in the West to be likable that people often reconfigure their entire personality depending
on the person they’re dealing with.
Rejection Makes Your Life Better
As an extension of our positivity/consumer culture, many of us have been “indoctrinated” with the
belief that we should try to be as inherently accepting and affirmative as possible. This is a
cornerstone of many of the so-called positive thinking books: open yourself up to opportunities, be
accepting, say yes to everything and everyone, and so on.
But we need to reject something. Otherwise, we stand for nothing. If nothing is better or more
desirable than anything else, then we are empty and our life is meaningless. We are without values
and therefore live our life without any purpose.
The avoidance of rejection (both giving and receiving it) is often sold to us as a way to make
ourselves feel better. But avoiding rejection gives us short-term pleasure by making us rudderless and
directionless in the long term.
To truly appreciate something, you must confine yourself to it. There’s a certain level of joy and
meaning that you reach in life only when you’ve spent decades investing in a single relationship, a
single craft, a single career. And you cannot achieve those decades of investment without rejecting the
alternatives.
The act of choosing a value for yourself requires rejecting alternative values. If I choose to make
my marriage the most important part of my life, that means I’m (probably) choosing not to make
cocaine-fueled hooker orgies an important part of my life. If I’m choosing to judge myself based on
my ability to have open and accepting friendships, that means I’m rejecting trashing my friends behind
their backs. These are all healthy decisions, yet they require rejection at every turn.
The point is this: we all must give a fuck about something, in order to value something. And to
value something, we must reject what is not that something. To value X, we must reject non-X.
That rejection is an inherent and necessary part of maintaining our values, and therefore our
identity. We are defined by what we choose to reject. And if we reject nothing (perhaps in fear of
being rejected by something ourselves), we essentially have no identity at all.
The desire to avoid rejection at all costs, to avoid confrontation and conflict, the desire to attempt
to accept everything equally and to make everything cohere and harmonize, is a deep and subtle form
of entitlement. Entitled people, because they feel as though they deserve to feel great all the time,
avoid rejecting anything because doing so might make them or someone else feel bad. And because
they refuse to reject anything, they live a valueless, pleasure-driven, and self-absorbed life. All they
give a fuck about is sustaining the high a little bit longer, to avoid the inevitable failures of their life,
to pretend the suffering away.
Rejection is an important and crucial life skill. Nobody wants to be stuck in a relationship that
isn’t making them happy. Nobody wants to be stuck in a business doing work they hate and don’t
believe in. Nobody wants to feel that they can’t say what they really mean.
Yet people choose these things. All the time.
Honesty is a natural human craving. But part of having honesty in our lives is becoming
comfortable with saying and hearing the word “no.” In this way, rejection actually makes our
relationships better and our emotional lives healthier.
Boundaries
Once upon a time, there were two youngsters, a boy and a girl. Their families hated each other. But
the boy snuck into a party hosted by the girl’s family because he was kind of a dick. The girl sees the
boy, and angels sing so sweetly to her lady-parts that she instantly falls in love with him. Just like
that. And so he sneaks into her garden and they decide to get married the next freaking day, because,
you know, that’s totally practical, especially when your parents want to murder each other. Jump
ahead a few days. Their families find out about the marriage and throw a shit-fit. Mercutio dies. The
girl is so upset that she drinks a potion that will put her to sleep for two days. But, unfortunately, the
young couple hasn’t learned the ins and outs of good marital communication yet, and the young girl
totally forgets to mention something about it to her new husband. The young man therefore mistakes
his new wife’s self-induced coma for suicide. He then totally loses his marbles and he commits
suicide, thinking he’s going to be with her in the afterlife or some shit. But then she wakes up from her
two-day coma, only to learn that her new husband has committed suicide, so she has the exact same
idea and kills herself too. The end.
Romeo and Juliet is synonymous with “romance” in our culture today. It is seen as the love story
in English-speaking culture, an emotional ideal to live up to. Yet when you really get down to what
happens in the story, these kids are absolutely out of their fucking minds. And they just killed
themselves to prove it!
It’s suspected by many scholars that Shakespeare wrote Romeo and Juliet not to celebrate
romance, but rather to satirize it, to show how absolutely nutty it was. He didn’t mean for the play to
be a glorification of love. In fact, he meant it to be the opposite: a big flashing neon sign blinking KEEP
OUT, with police tape around it saying DO NOT CROSS.
For most of human history, romantic love was not celebrated as it is now. In fact, up until the midnineteenth
century or so, love was seen as an unnecessary and potentially dangerous psychological
impediment to the more important things in life—you know, like farming well and/or marrying a guy
with a lot of sheep. Young people were often forcibly steered clear of their romantic passions in
favor of practical economic marriages that would yield stability for both them and their families.
But today, we all get brain boners for this kind of batshit crazy love. It dominates our culture. And
the more dramatic, the better. Whether it’s Ben Affleck working to destroy an asteroid to save the
earth for the girl he loves, or Mel Gibson murdering hundreds of Englishmen and fantasizing about his
raped and murdered wife while being tortured to death, or that Elven chick giving up her immortality
to be with Aragorn in Lord of the Rings, or stupid romantic comedies where Jimmy Fallon forgoes
his Red Sox playoff tickets because Drew Barrymore has, like, needs or something.
If this sort of romantic love were cocaine, then as a culture we’d all be like Tony Montana in
Scarface: burying our faces in a fucking mountain of it, screaming, “Say hello to my lee-tle friend!”
The problem is that we’re finding out that romantic love is kind of like cocaine. Like,
frighteningly similar to cocaine. Like, stimulates the exact same parts of your brain as cocaine. Like,
gets you high and makes you feel good for a while but also creates as many problems as it solves, as
does cocaine.
Most elements of romantic love that we pursue—the dramatic and dizzyingly emotional displays
of affection, the topsy-turvy ups and downs—aren’t healthy, genuine displays of love. In fact, they’re
often just another form of entitlement playing out through people’s relationships.
I know: that makes me sound like such a downer. Seriously, what kind of guy shits on romantic
love? But hear me out.
The truth is, there are healthy forms of love and unhealthy forms of love. Unhealthy love is based
on two people trying to escape their problems through their emotions for each other—in other words,
they’re using each other as an escape. Healthy love is based on two people acknowledging and
addressing their own problems with each other’s support.
The difference between a healthy and an unhealthy relationship comes down to two things: 1) how
well each person in the relationship accepts responsibility, and 2) the willingness of each person to
both reject and be rejected by their partner.
Anywhere there is an unhealthy or toxic relationship, there will be a poor and porous sense of
responsibility on both sides, and there will be an inability to give and/or receive rejection. Wherever
there is a healthy and loving relationship, there will be clear boundaries between the two people and
their values, and there will be an open avenue of giving and receiving rejection when necessary.
By “boundaries” I mean the delineation between two people’s responsibilities for their own
problems. People in a healthy relationship with strong boundaries will take responsibility for their
own values and problems and not take responsibility for their partner’s values and problems. People
in a toxic relationship with poor or no boundaries will regularly avoid responsibility for their own
problems and/or take responsibility for their partner’s problems.
What do poor boundaries look like? Here are some examples:
“You can’t go out with your friends without me. You know how jealous I get. You have to stay
home with me.”
“My coworkers are idiots; they always make me late to meetings because I have to tell them
how to do their jobs.”
“I can’t believe you made me feel so stupid in front of my own sister. Never disagree with me in
front of her again!”
“I’d love to take that job in Milwaukee, but my mother would never forgive me for moving so
far away.”
“I can date you, but can you not tell my friend Cindy? She gets really insecure when I have a
boyfriend and she doesn’t.”
In each scenario, the person is either taking responsibility for problems/emotions that are not
theirs, or demanding that someone else take responsibility for their problems/emotions.
In general, entitled people fall into one of two traps in their relationships. Either they expect other
people to take responsibility for their problems: “I wanted a nice relaxing weekend at home. You
should have known that and canceled your plans.” Or they take on too much responsibility for other
people’s problems: “She just lost her job again, but it’s probably my fault because I wasn’t as
supportive of her as I could have been. I’m going to help her rewrite her résumé tomorrow.”
Entitled people adopt these strategies in their relationships, as with everything, to help avoid
accepting responsibility for their own problems. As a result, their relationships are fragile and fake,
products of avoiding inner pain rather than embracing a genuine appreciation and adoration of their
partner.
This goes not just for romantic relationships, by the way, but also for family relationships and
friendships. An overbearing mother may take responsibility for every problem in her children’s lives.
Her own entitlement then encourages an entitlement in her children, as they grow up to believe other
people should always be responsible for their problems.
(This is why the problems in your romantic relationships always eerily resemble the problems in
your parents’ relationship.)
When you have murky areas of responsibility for your emotions and actions—areas where it’s
unclear who is responsible for what, whose fault is what, why you’re doing what you’re doing—you
never develop strong values for yourself. Your only value becomes making your partner happy. Or
your only value becomes your partner making you happy.
This is self-defeating, of course. And relationships characterized by such murkiness usually go
down like the Hindenburg, with all the drama and fireworks.
People can’t solve your problems for you. And they shouldn’t try, because that won’t make you
happy. You can’t solve other people’s problems for them either, because that likewise won’t make
them happy. The mark of an unhealthy relationship is two people who try to solve each other’s
problems in order to feel good about themselves. Rather, a healthy relationship is when two people
solve their own problems in order to feel good about each other.
The setting of proper boundaries doesn’t mean you can’t help or support your partner or be helped
and supported yourself. You both should support each other. But only because you choose to support
and be supported. Not because you feel obligated or entitled.
Entitled people who blame others for their own emotions and actions do so because they believe
that if they constantly paint themselves as victims, eventually someone will come along and save
them, and they will receive the love they’ve always wanted.
Entitled people who take the blame for other people’s emotions and actions do so because they
believe that if they “fix” their partner and save him or her, they will receive the love and appreciation
they’ve always wanted.
These are the yin and yang of any toxic relationship: the victim and the saver, the person who
starts fires because it makes her feel important and the person who puts out fires because it makes him
feel important.
These two types of people are drawn strongly to one another, and they usually end up together.
Their pathologies match one another perfectly. Often they’ve grown up with parents who each exhibit
one of these traits as well. So their model for a “happy” relationship is one based on entitlement and
poor boundaries.
Sadly, they both fail in meeting the other’s actual needs. In fact, their pattern of overblaming and
overaccepting blame perpetuates the entitlement and shitty self-worth that have been keeping them
from getting their emotional needs met in the first place. The victim creates more and more problems
to solve—not because additional real problems exist, but because it gets her the attention and
affection she craves. The saver solves and solves—not because she actually cares about the
problems, but because she believes she must fix others’ problems in order to deserve attention and
affection for herself. In both cases, the intentions are selfish and conditional and therefore selfsabotaging,
and genuine love is rarely experienced.
The victim, if he really loved the saver, would say, “Look, this is my problem; you don’t have to
fix it for me. Just support me while I fix it myself.” That would actually be a demonstration of love:
taking responsibility for your own problems and not holding your partner responsible for them.
If the saver really wanted to save the victim, the saver would say, “Look, you’re blaming others
for your own problems; deal with this yourself.” And in a sick way, that would actually be a
demonstration of love: helping someone solve their own problems.
Instead, victims and savers both use each other to achieve emotional highs. It’s like an addiction
they fulfill in one another. Ironically, when presented with emotionally healthy people to date, they
usually feel bored or lack “chemistry” with them. They pass on emotionally healthy, secure
individuals because the secure partner’s solid boundaries don’t feel “exciting” enough to stimulate
the constant highs necessary in the entitled person.
For victims, the hardest thing to do in the world is to hold themselves accountable for their
problems. They’ve spent their whole life believing that others are responsible for their fate. That first
step of taking responsibility for themselves is often terrifying.
For savers, the hardest thing to do in the world is to stop taking responsibility for other people’s
problems. They’ve spent their whole life feeling valued and loved only when they’re saving
somebody else—so letting go of this need is terrifying to them as well.
If you make a sacrifice for someone you care about, it needs to be because you want to, not
because you feel obligated or because you fear the consequences of not doing so. If your partner is
going to make a sacrifice for you, it needs to because he or she genuinely wants to, not because
you’ve manipulated the sacrifice through anger or guilt. Acts of love are valid only if they’re
performed without conditions or expectations.
It can be difficult for people to recognize the difference between doing something out of
obligation and doing it voluntarily. So here’s a litmus test: ask yourself, “If I refused, how would the
relationship change?” Similarly, ask, “If my partner refused something I wanted, how would the
relationship change?”
If the answer is that a refusal would cause a blowout of drama and broken china plates, then that’s
a bad sign for your relationship. It suggests that your relationship is conditional—based on superficial
benefits received from one another, rather than on unconditional acceptance of each other (along with
each other’s problems).
People with strong boundaries are not afraid of a temper tantrum, an argument, or getting hurt.
People with weak boundaries are terrified of those things and will constantly mold their own
behavior to fit the highs and lows of their relational emotional roller coaster.
People with strong boundaries understand that it’s unreasonable to expect two people to
accommodate each other 100 percent and fulfill every need the other has. People with strong
boundaries understand that they may hurt someone’s feelings sometimes, but ultimately they can’t
determine how other people feel. People with strong boundaries understand that a healthy relationship
is not about controlling one another’s emotions, but rather about each partner supporting the other in
their individual growth and in solving their own problems.
It’s not about giving a fuck about everything your partner gives a fuck about; it’s about giving a
fuck about your partner regardless of the fucks he or she gives. That’s unconditional love, baby.
How to Build Trust
My wife is one of those women who spend a lot of time in front of the mirror. She loves to look
amazing, and I love for her to look amazing too (obviously).
Nights before we go out, she comes out of the bathroom after an hour-long
makeup/hair/clothes/whatever-women-do-in-there session and asks me how she looks. She’s usually
gorgeous. Every once in a while, though, she looks bad. Maybe she tried to do something new with
her hair, or decided to wear a pair of boots that some flamboyant fashion designer from Milan thought
were avant-garde. Whatever the reason—it just doesn’t work.
When I tell her this, she usually gets pissed off. As she marches back into the closet or the
bathroom to redo everything and make us thirty minutes late, she spouts a bunch of four-letter words
and sometimes even slings a few of them in my direction.
Men stereotypically lie in this situation to make their girlfriends/wives happy. But I don’t. Why?
Because honesty in my relationship is more important to me than feeling good all the time. The last
person I should ever have to censor myself with is the woman I love.
Fortunately, I’m married to a woman who agrees and is willing to hear my uncensored thoughts.
She calls me out on my bullshit too, of course, which is one of the most important traits she offers me
as a partner. Sure, my ego gets bruised sometimes, and I bitch and complain and try to argue, but a
few hours later I come sulking back and admit that she was right. And holy crap she makes me a better
person, even though I hate hearing it at the time.
When our highest priority is to always make ourselves feel good, or to always make our partner
feel good, then nobody ends up feeling good. And our relationship falls apart without our even
knowing it.
Without conflict, there can be no trust. Conflict exists to show us who is there for us
unconditionally and who is just there for the benefits. No one trusts a yes-man. If Disappointment
Panda were here, he’d tell you that the pain in our relationship is necessary to cement our trust in each
other and produce greater intimacy.
For a relationship to be healthy, both people must be willing and able to both say no and hear no.
Without that negation, without that occasional rejection, boundaries break down and one person’s
problems and values come to dominate the other’s. Conflict is not only normal, then; it’s absolutely
necessary for the maintenance of a healthy relationship. If two people who are close are not able to
hash out their differences openly and vocally, then the relationship is based on manipulation and
misrepresentation, and it will slowly become toxic.
Trust is the most important ingredient in any relationship, for the simple reason that without trust,
the relationship doesn’t actually mean anything. A person could tell you that she loves you, wants to
be with you, would give up everything for you, but if you don’t trust her, you get no benefit from those
statements. You don’t feel loved until you trust that the love being expressed toward you comes
without any special conditions or baggage attached to it.
This is what’s so destructive about cheating. It’s not about the sex. It’s about the trust that has been
destroyed as a result of the sex. Without trust, the relationship can no longer function. So it’s either
rebuild the trust or say your goodbyes.
I often get emails from people who have been cheated on by their significant other but want to stay
with that partner and are wondering how they can trust him or her again. Without trust, they tell me,
the relationship has begun to feel like a burden, like a threat that must be monitored and questioned
rather than enjoyed.
The problem here is that most people who get caught cheating apologize and give the “It will
never happen again” spiel and that’s that, as if penises fell into various orifices completely by
accident. Many cheatees accept this response at face value, and don’t question the values and fucks
given by their partner (pun totally intended); they don’t ask themselves whether those values and fucks
make their partner a good person to stay with. They’re so concerned with holding on to their
relationship that they fail to recognize that it’s become a black hole consuming their self-respect.
If people cheat, it’s because something other than the relationship is more important to them. It
may be power over others. It may be validation through sex. It may be giving in to their own impulses.
Whatever it is, it’s clear that the cheater’s values are not aligned in a way to support a healthy
relationship. And if the cheater doesn’t admit this or come to terms with it, if he just gives the old “I
don’t know what I was thinking; I was stressed out and drunk and she was there” response, then he
lacks the serious self-awareness necessary to solve any relationship problems.
What needs to happen is that cheaters have to start peeling away at their self-awareness onion and
figure out what fucked-up values caused them to break the trust of the relationship (and whether they
actually still value the relationship). They need to be able to say, “You know what: I am selfish. I care
about myself more than the relationship; to be honest, I don’t really respect the relationship much at
all.” If cheaters can’t express their shitty values, and show that those values have been overridden,
then there’s no reason to believe that they can be trusted. And if they can’t be trusted, then the
relationship is not going to get better or change.
The other factor in regaining trust after it’s been broken is a practical one: a track record. If
someone breaks your trust, words are nice; but you then need to see a consistent track record of
improved behavior. Only then can you begin trusting that the cheater’s values are now aligned
properly and the person really will change.
Unfortunately, building a track record for trust takes time—certainly a lot more time than it takes
to break trust. And during that trust-building period, things are likely to be pretty shitty. So both
people in the relationship must be conscious of the struggle they’re choosing to undertake.
I use the example of cheating in a romantic relationship, but this process applies to a breach in
any relationship. When trust is destroyed, it can be rebuilt only if the following two steps happen: 1)
the trust-breaker admits the true values that caused the breach and owns up to them, and 2) the trustbreaker
builds a solid track record of improved behavior over time. Without the first step, there
should be no attempt at reconciliation in the first place.
Trust is like a china plate. If you break it once, with some care and attention you can put it back
together again. But if you break it again, it splits into even more pieces and it takes far longer to piece
together again. If you break it more and more times, eventually it shatters to the point where it’s
impossible to restore. There are too many broken pieces, and too much dust.
Freedom Through Commitment
Consumer culture is very good at making us want more, more, more. Underneath all the hype and
marketing is the implication that more is always better. I bought into this idea for years. Make more
money, visit more countries, have more experiences, be with more women.
But more is not always better. In fact, the opposite is true. We are actually often happier with less.
When we’re overloaded with opportunities and options, we suffer from what psychologists refer to as
the paradox of choice. Basically, the more options we’re given, the less satisfied we become with
whatever we choose, because we’re aware of all the other options we’re potentially forfeiting.
So if you have a choice between two places to live and pick one, you’ll likely feel confident and
comfortable that you made the right choice. You’ll be satisfied with your decision.
But if you have a choice among twenty-eight places to live and pick one, the paradox of choice
says that you’ll likely spend years agonizing, doubting, and second-guessing yourself, wondering if
you really made the “right” choice, and if you’re truly maximizing your own happiness. And this
anxiety, this desire for certainty and perfection and success, will make you unhappy.
So what do we do? Well, if you’re like I used to be, you avoid choosing anything at all. You aim
to keep your options open as long as possible. You avoid commitment.
But while investing deeply in one person, one place, one job, one activity might deny us the
breadth of experience we’d like, pursuing a breadth of experience denies us the opportunity to
experience the rewards of depth of experience. There are some experiences that you can have only
when you’ve lived in the same place for five years, when you’ve been with the same person for over
a decade, when you’ve been working on the same skill or craft for half your lifetime. Now that I’m in
my thirties, I can finally recognize that commitment, in its own way, offers a wealth of opportunity and
experiences that would otherwise never be available to me, no matter where I went or what I did.
When you’re pursuing a wide breadth of experience, there are diminishing returns to each new
adventure, each new person or thing. When you’ve never left your home country, the first country you
visit inspires a massive perspective shift, because you have such a narrow experience base to draw
on. But when you’ve been to twenty countries, the twenty-first adds little. And when you’ve been to
fifty, the fifty-first adds even less.
The same goes for material possessions, money, hobbies, jobs, friends, and romantic/sexual
partners—all the lame superficial values people choose for themselves. The older you get, the more
experienced you get, the less significantly each new experience affects you. The first time I drank at a
party was exciting. The hundredth time was fun. The five hundredth time felt like a normal weekend.
And the thousandth time felt boring and unimportant.
The big story for me personally over the past few years has been my ability to open myself up to
commitment. I’ve chosen to reject all but the very best people and experiences and values in my life. I
shut down all my business projects and decided to focus on writing full-time. Since then, my website
has become more popular than I’d ever imagined possible. I’ve committed to one woman for the long
haul and, to my surprise, have found this more rewarding than any of the flings, trysts, and one-night
stands I had in the past. I’ve committed to a single geographic location and doubled down on the
handful of my significant, genuine, healthy friendships.
And what I’ve discovered is something entirely counterintuitive: that there is a freedom and
liberation in commitment. I’ve found increased opportunity and upside in rejecting alternatives and
distractions in favor of what I’ve chosen to let truly matter to me.
Commitment gives you freedom because you’re no longer distracted by the unimportant and
frivolous. Commitment gives you freedom because it hones your attention and focus, directing them
toward what is most efficient at making you healthy and happy. Commitment makes decision-making
easier and removes any fear of missing out; knowing that what you already have is good enough, why
would you ever stress about chasing more, more, more again? Commitment allows you to focus
intently on a few highly important goals and achieve a greater degree of success than you otherwise
would.
In this way, the rejection of alternatives liberates us—rejection of what does not align with our
most important values, with our chosen metrics, rejection of the constant pursuit of breadth without
depth.
Yes, breadth of experience is likely necessary and desirable when you’re young—after all, you
have to go out there and discover what seems worth investing yourself in. But depth is where the gold
is buried. And you have to stay committed to something and go deep to dig it up. That’s true in
relationships, in a career, in building a great lifestyle—in everything.
CHAPTER 9
. . . And Then You Die
Seek the truth for yourself, and I will meet you there.”
That was the last thing Josh ever said to me. He said it ironically, attempting to sound deep while
simultaneously making fun of people who attempt to sound deep. He was drunk and high. And he was
a good friend.
The most transformational moment of my life occurred when I was nineteen years old. My friend
Josh had taken me to a party on a lake just north of Dallas, Texas. There were condos on a hill and
below the hill was a pool, and below the pool was a cliff overlooking the lake. It was a small cliff,
maybe thirty feet high—certainly high enough to give you a second thought about jumping, but low
enough that with the right combination of alcohol and peer pressure that second thought could easily
vanish.
Shortly after arriving at the party, Josh and I sat in the pool together, drinking beers and talking as
young angsty males do. We talked about drinking and bands and girls and all of the cool stuff Josh had
done that summer since dropping out of music school. We talked about playing in a band together and
moving to New York City—an impossible dream at the time.
We were just kids.
“Is it okay to jump off that?” I asked after a while, nodding toward the cliff over the lake.
“Yeah,” Josh said, “people do it all the time here.”
“Are you going to do it?”
He shrugged. “Maybe. We’ll see.”
Later in the evening, Josh and I got separated. I had become distracted by a pretty Asian girl who
liked video games, which to me, as a teenage nerd, was akin to winning the lottery. She had no
interest in me, but she was friendly and happy to let me talk, so I talked. After a few beers, I gathered
enough courage to ask her to go up to the house with me to get some food. She said sure.
As we walked up the hill, we bumped into Josh coming down. I asked him if he wanted food, but
he declined. I asked him where I could find him later on. He smiled and said, “Seek the truth for
yourself, and I will meet you there!”
I nodded and made a serious face. “Okay, I’ll see you there,” I replied, as if everyone knew
exactly where the truth was and how to get to it.
Josh laughed and walked down the hill toward the cliff. I laughed and continued up the hill
toward the house.
I don’t remember how long I was inside. I just remember that when the girl and I came out again,
everyone was gone and there were sirens. The pool was empty. People were running down the hill
toward the shoreline below the cliff. There were others already down by the water. I could make out
a couple guys swimming around. It was dark and hard to see. The music droned on, but nobody
listened.
Still not putting two-and-two together, I hurried down to the shoreline, gnawing on my sandwich,
curious as to what everyone was looking at. Halfway down, the pretty Asian girl said to me, “I think
something terrible has happened.”
When I got to the bottom of the hill, I asked someone where Josh was. No one looked at me or
acknowledged me. Everyone stared at the water. I asked again, and a girl started crying
uncontrollably.
That’s when I put two-and-two together.
It took scuba divers three hours to find Josh’s body at the bottom of the lake. The autopsy would
later say that his legs had cramped up due to dehydration from the alcohol, as well as to the impact of
the jump from the cliff. It was dark out when he went in, the water layered on the night, black on
black. No one could see where his screams for help were coming from. Just the splashes. Just the
sounds. His parents later told me that he was a terrible swimmer. I’d had no idea.
It took me twelve hours to let myself cry. I was in my car, driving back home to Austin the next
morning. I called my dad and told him that I was still near Dallas and that I was going to miss work.
(I’d been working for him that summer.) He asked, “Why; what happened? Is everything all right?”
And that’s when it all came out: the waterworks. The wails and the screams and the snot. I pulled the
car over to the side of the road and clutched the phone and cried the way a little boy cries to his
father.
I went into a deep depression that summer. I thought I’d been depressed before, but this was a
whole new level of meaninglessness—sadness so deep that it physically hurt. People would come by
and try to cheer me up, and I would sit there and hear them say all the right things and do all the right
things; and I would tell them thank you and how nice it was of them to come over, and I would fake a
smile and lie and say that it was getting better, but underneath I just felt nothing.
I dreamed about Josh for a few months after that. Dreams where he and I would have full-blown
conversations about life and death, as well as about random, pointless things. Up until that point in my
life, I had been a pretty typical middle-class stoner kid: lazy, irresponsible, socially anxious, and
deeply insecure. Josh, in many ways, had been a person I looked up to. He was older, more confident,
more experienced, and more accepting of and open to the world around him. In one of my last dreams
of Josh, I was sitting in a Jacuzzi with him (yeah, I know, weird), and I said something like, “I’m
really sorry you died.” He laughed. I don’t remember exactly what his words were, but he said
something like, “Why do you care that I’m dead when you’re still so afraid to live?” I woke up
crying.
It was sitting on my mom’s couch that summer, staring into the so-called abyss, seeing the endless
and incomprehensible nothingness where Josh’s friendship used to be, when I came to the startling
realization that if there really is no reason to do anything, then there is also no reason to not do
anything; that in the face of the inevitability of death, there is no reason to ever give in to one’s fear or
embarrassment or shame, since it’s all just a bunch of nothing anyway; and that by spending the
majority of my short life avoiding what was painful and uncomfortable, I had essentially been
avoiding being alive at all.
That summer, I gave up the weed and the cigarettes and the video games. I gave up my silly rock
star fantasies and dropped out of music school and signed up for college courses. I started going to
the gym and lost a bunch of weight. I made new friends. I got my first girlfriend. For the first time in
my life I actually studied for classes, gaining me the startling realization that I could make good
grades if only I gave a shit. The next summer, I challenged myself to read fifty nonfiction books in fifty
days, and then did it. The following year, I transferred to an excellent university on the other side of
the country, where I excelled for the first time, both academically and socially.
Josh’s death marks the clearest before/after point I can identify in my life. Pre-tragedy, I was
inhibited, unambitious, forever obsessed and confined by what I imagined the world might be thinking
of me. Post-tragedy, I morphed into a new person: responsible, curious,hardworking. I still had my
insecurities and my baggage—as we always do—but now I gave a fuck about something more
important than my insecurities and my baggage. And that made all the difference. Oddly, it was
someone else’s death that gave me permission to finally live. And perhaps the worst moment of my
life was also the most transformational.
Death scares us. And because it scares us, we avoid thinking about it, talking about it, sometimes
even acknowledging it, even when it’s happening to someone close to us.
Yet, in a bizarre, backwards way, death is the light by which the shadow of all of life’s meaning is
measured. Without death, everything would feel inconsequential, all experience arbitrary, all metrics
and values suddenly zero.
Something Beyond Our Selves
Ernest Becker was an academic outcast. In 1960, he got his Ph.D. in anthropology; his doctoral
research compared the unlikely and unconventional practices of Zen Buddhism and psychoanalysis.
At the time, Zen was seen as something for hippies and drug addicts, and Freudian psychoanalysis
was considered a quack form of psychology left over from the Stone Age.
In his first job as an assistant professor, Becker quickly fell into a crowd that denounced the
practice of psychiatry as a form of fascism. They saw the practice as an unscientific form of
oppression against the weak and helpless.
The problem was that Becker’s boss was a psychiatrist. So it was kind of like walking into your
first job and proudly comparing your boss to Hitler.
As you can imagine, he was fired.
So Becker took his radical ideas somewhere that they might be accepted: Berkeley, California.
But this, too, didn’t last long.
Because it wasn’t just his anti-establishment tendencies that got Becker into trouble; it was his
odd teaching methods as well. He would use Shakespeare to teach psychology, psychology textbooks
to teach anthropology, and anthropological data to teach sociology. He’d dress up as King Lear and
do mock sword fights in class and go on long political rants that had little to do with the lesson plan.
His students adored him. The other faculty loathed him. Less than a year later, he was fired again.
Becker then landed at San Francisco State University, where he actually kept his job for more than
a year. But when student protests erupted over the Vietnam War, the university called in the National
Guard and things got violent. When Becker sided with the students and publicly condemned the
actions of the dean (again, his boss being Hitleresque and everything), he was, once again, promptly
fired.
Becker changed jobs four times in six years. And before he could get fired from the fifth, he got
colon cancer. The prognosis was grim. He spent the next few years bedridden and had little hope of
surviving. So Becker decided to write a book. This book would be about death.
Becker died in 1974. His book The Denial of Death, would win the Pulitzer Prize and become
one of the most influential intellectual works of the twentieth century, shaking up the fields of
psychology and anthropology, while making profound philosophical claims that are still influential
today.
The Denial of Death essentially makes two points:
1. Humans are unique in that we’re the only animals that can conceptualize and think about
ourselves abstractly. Dogs don’t sit around and worry about their career. Cats don’t think about
their past mistakes or wonder what would have happened if they’d done something differently.
Monkeys don’t argue over future possibilities, just as fish don’t sit around wondering if other fish
would like them more if they had longer fins.
As humans, we’re blessed with the ability to imagine ourselves in hypothetical situations, to
contemplate both the past and the future, to imagine other realities or situations where things might
be different. And it’s because of this unique mental ability, Becker says, that we all, at some point,
become aware of the inevitability of our own death. Because we’re able to conceptualize
alternate versions of reality, we are also the only animal capable of imagining a reality without
ourselves in it.
This realization causes what Becker calls “death terror,” a deep existential anxiety that
underlies everything we think or do.
2. Becker’s second point starts with the premise that we essentially have two “selves.” The first self
is the physical self—the one that eats, sleeps, snores, and poops. The second self is our
conceptual self—our identity, or how we see ourselves.
Becker’s argument is this: We are all aware on some level that our physical self will
eventually die, that this death is inevitable, and that its inevitability—on some unconscious level
—scares the shit out of us. Therefore, in order to compensate for our fear of the inevitable loss of
our physical self, we try to construct a conceptual self that will live forever. This is why people
try so hard to put their names on buildings, on statues, on spines of books. It’s why we feel
compelled to spend so much time giving ourselves to others, especially to children, in the hopes
that our influence—our conceptual self—will last way beyond our physical self. That we will be
remembered and revered and idolized long after our physical self ceases to exist.
Becker called such efforts our “immortality projects,” projects that allow our conceptual self
to live on way past the point of our physical death. All of human civilization, he says, is basically
a result of immortality projects: the cities and governments and structures and authorities in place
today were all immortality projects of men and women who came before us. They are the
remnants of conceptual selves that ceased to die. Names like Jesus, Muhammad, Napoleon, and
Shakespeare are just as powerful today as when those men lived, if not more so. And that’s the
whole point. Whether it be through mastering an art form, conquering a new land, gaining great
riches, or simply having a large and loving family that will live on for generations, all the
meaning in our life is shaped by this innate desire to never truly die.
Religion, politics, sports, art, and technological innovation are the result of people’s immortality
projects. Becker argues that wars and revolutions and mass murder occur when one group of people’s
immortality projects rub up against another group’s. Centuries of oppression and the bloodshed of
millions have been justified as the defense of one group’s immortality project against another’s.
But, when our immortality projects fail, when the meaning is lost, when the prospect of our
conceptual self outliving our physical self no longer seems possible or likely, death terror—that
horrible, depressing anxiety—creeps back into our mind. Trauma can cause this, as can shame and
social ridicule. As can, as Becker points out, mental illness.
If you haven’t figured it out yet, our immortality projects are our values. They are the barometers
of meaning and worth in our life. And when our values fail, so do we, psychologically speaking.
What Becker is saying, in essence, is that we’re all driven by fear to give way too many fucks about
something, because giving a fuck about something is the only thing that distracts us from the reality
and inevitability of our own death. And to truly not give a single fuck is to achieve a quasi-spiritual
state of embracing the impermanence of one’s own existence. In that state, one is far less likely to get
caught up in various forms of entitlement.
Becker later came to a startling realization on his deathbed: that people’s immortality projects
were actually the problem, not the solution; that rather than attempting to implement, often through
lethal force, their conceptual self across the world, people should question their conceptual self and
become more comfortable with the reality of their own death. Becker called this “the bitter antidote,”
and struggled with reconciling it himself as he stared down his own demise. While death is bad, it is
inevitable. Therefore, we should not avoid this realization, but rather come to terms with it as best we
can. Because once we become comfortable with the fact of our own death—the root terror, the
underlying anxiety motivating all of life’s frivolous ambitions—we can then choose our values more
freely, unrestrained by the illogical quest for immortality, and freed from dangerous dogmatic views.
The Sunny Side of Death
I step from rock to rock, climbing steadily, leg muscles stretching and aching. In that trancelike state
that comes from slow, repetitive physical exertion, I’m nearing the top. The sky gets wide and deep.
I’m alone now. My friends are far below me, taking pictures of the ocean.
Finally, I climb over a small boulder and the view opens up. I can see from here to the infinite
horizon. It feels as though I’m staring at the edge of the earth, where water meets the sky, blue on blue.
The wind screams across my skin. I look up. It’s bright. It’s beautiful.
I’m at South Africa’s Cape of Good Hope, once thought to be the southern tip of Africa and the
southernmost point in the world. It’s a tumultuous place, a place full of storms and treacherous
waters. A place that’s seen centuries of trade and commerce and human endeavor. A place, ironically,
of lost hopes.
There is a saying in Portuguese: Ele dobra o Cabo da Boa Esperança. It means, “He’s rounding
the Cape of Good Hope.” Ironically, it means that the person’s life is in its final phase, that he’s
incapable of accomplishing anything more.
I step across the rocks toward the blue, allowing its vastness to engulf my field of vision. I’m
sweating yet cold. Excited yet nervous. Is this it?
The wind is slapping my ears. I hear nothing, but I see the edge: where the rock meets oblivion. I
stop and stand for a moment, several yards away. I can see the ocean below, lapping and frothing
against cliffs stretching out for miles to either side. The tides are furious against the impenetrable
walls. Straight ahead, it’s a sheer drop of at least fifty yards to the water below.
To my right, tourists are dotted across the landscape below, snapping photos and aggregating
themselves into antlike formations. To my left is Asia. In front of me is the sky and behind is me is
everything I’ve ever hoped for and brought with me.
What if this is it? What if this is all there is?
I look around. I’m alone. I take my first step toward the edge of the cliff.
The human body seems to come equipped with a natural radar for death-inducing situations. For
example, the moment you get within about ten feet of a cliff edge, minus guardrail, a certain tension
digs into your body. Your back stiffens. Your skin ripples. Your eyes become hyperfocused on every
detail of your environment. Your feet feel as though they’re made of rock. It’s as if there were a big,
invisible magnet gently pulling your body back to safety.
But I fight the magnet. I drag the feet made of rock closer to the edge.
At five feet away, your mind joins the party. You can now see not only the edge of the cliff, but
down the cliff face itself, which induces all sorts of unwanted visualizations of tripping and falling
and tumbling to a splashy death. It’s really fucking far, your mind reminds you. Like, really fucking
far. Dude, what are you doing? Stop moving. Stop it.
I tell my mind to shut up, and keep inching forward.
At three feet, your body goes into full-scale red alert. You are now within an errant shoelace-trip
of your life ending. It feels as though a hefty gust of wind could send you sailing off into that bluebisected
eternity. Your legs shake. As do your hands. As does your voice, in case you need to remind
yourself you’re not about to plummet to your death.
The three-foot distance is most people’s absolute limit. It’s just close enough to lean forward and
catch a glimpse of the bottom, but still far enough to feel as though you’re not at any real risk of
killing yourself. Standing that close to the edge of a cliff, even one as beautiful and mesmerizing as
the Cape of Good Hope, induces a heady sense of vertigo, and threatens to regurgitate any recent
meal.
Is this it? Is this all there is? Do I already know everything I will ever know?
I take another microstep, then another. Two feet now. My forward leg vibrates as I put the weight
of my body on it. I shuffle on. Against the magnet. Against my mind. Against all my better instincts for
survival.
One foot now. I’m now looking straight down the cliff face. I feel a sudden urge to cry. My body
instinctively crouches, protecting itself against something imagined and inexplicable. The wind comes
in hailstorms. The thoughts come in right hooks.
At one foot you feel like you’re floating. Anything but looking straight down feels as though
you’re part of the sky itself. You actually kind of expect to fall at this point.
I crouch there for a moment, catching my breath, collecting my thoughts. I force myself to stare
down at the water hitting the rocks below me. Then I look again to my right, at the little ants milling
about the signage below me, snapping photos, chasing tour buses, on the off chance that somebody
somehow sees me. This desire for attention is wholly irrational. But so is all of this. It’s impossible
to make me out up here, of course. And even if it weren’t, there’s nothing that those distant people
could say or do.
All I hear is the wind.
Is this it?
My body shudders, the fear becoming euphoric and blinding. I focus my mind and clear my
thoughts in a kind of meditation. Nothing makes you present and mindful like being mere inches away
from your own death. I straighten up and look out again, and find myself smiling. I remind myself that
it’s all right to die.
This willing and even exuberant interfacing with one’s own mortality has ancient roots. The Stoics of
ancient Greece and Rome implored people to keep death in mind at all times, in order to appreciate
life more and remain humble in the face of its adversities. In various forms of Buddhism, the practice
of meditation is often taught as a means of preparing oneself for death while still remaining alive.
Dissolving one’s ego into an expansive nothingness—achieving the enlightened state of nirvana—is
seen as a trial run of letting oneself cross to the other side. Even Mark Twain, that hairy goofball who
came in and left on Halley’s Comet, said, “The fear of death follows from the fear of life. A man who
lives fully is prepared to die at any time.”
Back on the cliff, I bend down, slightly leaning back. I put my hands on the ground behind me and
gently lower myself onto my butt. I then gradually slide one leg over the edge of the cliff. There’s a
small rock jutting out of the cliff side. I rest my foot on it. Then I slide my other foot off the edge and
put it on the same small rock. I sit there a moment, leaning back on my palms, wind ruffling my hair.
The anxiety is bearable now, as long as I stay focused on the horizon.
Then I sit up straight and look down the cliff again. Fear shoots back up through my spine,
electrifying my limbs and laser-focusing my mind on the exact coordinates of every inch of my body.
The fear is stifling at times. But each time it stifles me, I empty my thoughts, focus my attention on the
bottom of the cliff below me, force myself to gaze at my potential doom, and then to simply
acknowledge its existence.
I was now sitting on the edge of the world, at the southern-most tip of hope, the gateway to the
east. The feeling was exhilarating. I can feel the adrenaline pumping through my body. Being so still,
so conscious, never felt so thrilling. I listen to the wind and watch the ocean and look out upon the
ends of the earth—and then I laugh with the light, all that it touches being good.
Confronting the reality of our own mortality is important because it obliterates all the crappy, fragile,
superficial values in life. While most people whittle their days chasing another buck, or a little bit
more fame and attention, or a little bit more assurance that they’re right or loved, death confronts all
of us with a far more painful and important question: What is your legacy?
How will the world be different and better when you’re gone? What mark will you have made?
What influence will you have caused? They say that a butterfly flapping its wings in Africa can cause
a hurricane in Florida; well, what hurricanes will you leave in your wake?
As Becker pointed out, this is arguably the only truly important question in our life. Yet we avoid
thinking about it. One, because it’s hard. Two, because it’s scary. Three, because we have no fucking
clue what we’re doing.
And when we avoid this question, we let trivial and hateful values hijack our brains and take
control of our desires and ambitions. Without acknowledging the ever-present gaze of death, the
superficial will appear important, and the important will appear superficial. Death is the only thing
we can know with any certainty. And as such, it must be the compass by which we orient all of our
other values and decisions. It is the correct answer to all of the questions we should ask but never do.
The only way to be comfortable with death is to understand and see yourself as something bigger than
yourself; to choose values that stretch beyond serving yourself, that are simple and immediate and
controllable and tolerant of the chaotic world around you. This is the basic root of all happiness.
Whether you’re listening to Aristotle or the psychologists at Harvard or Jesus Christ or the goddamn
Beatles, they all say that happiness comes from the same thing: caring about something greater than
yourself, believing that you are a contributing component in some much larger entity, that your life is
but a mere side process of some great unintelligible production. This feeling is what people go to
church for; it’s what they fight in wars for; it’s what they raise families and save pensions and build
bridges and invent cell phones for: this fleeting sense of being part of something greater and more
unknowable than themselves.
And entitlement strips this away from us. The gravity of entitlement sucks all attention inward,
toward ourselves, causing us to feel as though we are at the center of all of the problems in the
universe, that we are the one suffering all of the injustices, that we are the one who deserves greatness
over all others.
As alluring as it is, entitlement isolates us. Our curiosity and excitement for the world turns in
upon itself and reflects our own biases and projections onto every person we meet and every event
we experience. This feels sexy and enticing and may feel good for a while and sells a lot of tickets,
but it’s spiritual poison.
It’s these dynamics that plague us now. We are so materially well off, yet so psychologically
tormented in so many low-level and shallow ways. People relinquish all responsibility, demanding
that society cater to their feelings and sensibilities. People hold on to arbitrary certainties and try to
enforce them on others, often violently, in the name of some made-up righteous cause. People, high on
a sense of false superiority, fall into inaction and lethargy for fear of trying something worthwhile and
failing at it.
The pampering of the modern mind has resulted in a population that feels deserving of something
without earning that something, a population that feels they have a right to something without
sacrificing for it. People declare themselves experts, entrepreneurs, inventors, innovators, mavericks,
and coaches without any real-life experience. And they do this not because they actually think they are
greater than everybody else; they do it because they feel that they need to be great to be accepted in a
world that broadcasts only the extraordinary.
Our culture today confuses great attention and great success, assuming them to be the same thing.
But they are not.
You are great. Already. Whether you realize it or not. Whether anybody else realizes it or not.
And it’s not because you launched an iPhone app, or finished school a year early, or bought yourself a
sweet-ass boat. These things do not define greatness.
You are already great because in the face of endless confusion and certain death, you continue to
choose what to give a fuck about and what not to. This mere fact, this simple optioning for your own
values in life, already makes you beautiful, already makes you successful, and already makes you
loved. Even if you don’t realize it. Even if you’re sleeping in a gutter and starving.
You too are going to die, and that’s because you too were fortunate enough to have lived. You may
not feel this. But go stand on a cliff sometime, and maybe you will.
Bukowski once wrote, “We’re all going to die, all of us. What a circus! That alone should make
us love each other, but it doesn’t. We are terrorized and flattened by life’s trivialities; we are eaten up
by nothing.”
Looking back on that night, out by that lake, when I watched my friend Josh’s body getting fished
out of the lake by paramedics. I remember staring into the black Texas night and watching my ego
slowly dissolve into it. Josh’s death taught me much more than I initially realized. Yes, it helped me to
seize the day, to take responsibility for my choices, and to pursue my dreams with less shame and
inhibition.
But these were side effects of a deeper, more primary lesson. And the primary lesson was this:
there is nothing to be afraid of. Ever. And reminding myself of my own death repeatedly over the
years—whether it be through meditation, through reading philosophy, or through doing crazy shit like
standing on a cliff in South Africa—is the only thing that has helped me hold this realization front and
center in my mind. This acceptance of my death, this understanding of my own fragility, has made
everything easier—untangling my addictions, identifying and confronting my own entitlement,
accepting responsibility for my own problems—suffering through my fears and uncertainties,
accepting my failures and embracing rejections—it has all been made lighter by the thought of my
own death. The more I peer into the darkness, the brighter life gets, the quieter the world becomes,
and the less unconscious resistance I feel to, well, anything.
I sit there on the Cape for a few minutes, taking in everything. When I finally decide to get up, I put my
hands behind me and scoot back. Then, slowly, I stand. I check the ground around me—making sure
there’s no errant rock ready to sabotage me. Having recognized that I am safe, I begin to walk back to
reality—five feet, ten feet—my body restoring itself with each step. My feet become lighter. I let
life’s magnet draw me in.
As I step back over some rocks, back to the main path, I look up to see a man staring at me. I stop
and make eye contact with him.
“Um. I saw you sitting on the edge over there,” he says. His accent is Australian. The word
“there” rolls out of his mouth awkwardly. He points toward Antarctica.
“Yeah. The view is gorgeous, isn’t it?” I am smiling. He is not. He has a serious look on his face.
I brush my hands off on my shorts, my body still buzzing from my surrender. There’s an awkward
silence.
The Aussie stands for a moment, perplexed, still looking at me, clearly thinking of what to say
next. After a moment, he carefully pieces the words together.
“Is everything okay? How are you feeling?”
I pause for a moment, still smiling. “Alive. Very alive.”
His skepticism breaks and reveals a smile in its place. He gives a slight nod and heads down the
trail. I stand above, taking in the view, waiting for my friends to arrive on the peak.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book began as a big, messy thing and required more than just my own hands to chisel something
comprehensible out of it.
First and foremost, thank you to my brilliant and beautiful wife, Fernanda, who never hesitates to
say no to me when I need to hear it most. Not only do you make me a better person, but your
unconditional love and constant feedback during the writing process were indispensable.
To my parents, for putting up with my shit all these years and continuing to love me anyway. In
many ways, I don’t feel as though I fully became an adult until I understood many of the concepts in
this book. In that sense, it’s been a joy to get to know you as an adult these past few years. And to my
brother as well: I never doubt the existence of mutual love and respect between us, even if I
sometimes get butt-hurt that you don’t text me back.
To Philip Kemper and Drew Birnie—two big brains that conspire to make my brain appear much
larger than it actually is. Your hard work and brilliance continue to floor me.
To Michael Covell, for being my intellectual stress test, especially when it comes to
understanding psychological research, and for always challenging me on my assumptions. To my
editor, Luke Dempsey, for mercilessly tightening the screws on my writing, and for possibly having an
even fouler mouth than I do. To my agent, Mollie Glick, for helping me define the vision for the book
and pushing it much farther into the world than I ever expected to see it go. To Taylor Pearson, Dan
Andrews, and Jodi Ettenburg, for their support during this process; you three kept me both
accountable and sane, which are the only two things every writer needs.
And finally, to the millions of people who, for whatever reason, decided to read a potty-mouthed
asshole from Boston writing about life on his blog. The flood of emails I’ve received from those of
you willing to open up the most intimate corners of your life to me, a complete stranger, both humbles
me and inspires me. At this point in my life, I’ve spent thousands of hours reading and studying these
subjects. But you all continue to be my true education. Thank you.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MARK MANSON is a star blogger with more than two million readers. He lives in New York City.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.
barg1ains, sneak p,eeks, special ,offers, an,d
m,or,e-delivere,d strai,ght to your inb,ox.
SIGN UP NOW
CREDITS
Front cover design: M-80 Design; Ink art by pio3 | Shutterstock
COPYRIGHT
THE SUBTLE ART OF NOT GIVING A FUCK. Copyright © 2016 by Mark Manson. All rights reserved under International and PanAmerican
Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable
right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by
any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.
First HarperOne hardcover published 2016.
FIRST EDITION
ISBN 978–0–06–245771–4
EPub Edition August 2016 ISBN 9780062457738
16 17 18 19 20 RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada
www.harpercollins.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand
www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF, UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
195 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
www.harpercollins.com
